
Introduction 


My Story 

O N THE FINAL day of my sophomore year of high school, I was hit in 
the face with a baseball bat. As my classmate took a full swing, the 
bat slipped out of his hands and came flying toward me before striking 
me directly between the eyes, I have no memory of the moment of 
impact. 

The bat smashed into my face with such force that it crushed my 
nose into a distorted U-shape. The collision sent the soft tissue of my 
brain slamming into the inside of my skull. Immediately, a wave of 
swelling surged throughout my head. In a fraction of a second, I had a 
broken nose, multiple skull fractures, and two shattered eye sockets. 

When I opened my eyes, I saw people staring at me and running 
over to help. I looked down and noticed spots of red on my clothes. 

One of my classmates took the shirt off his back and handed it to me. I 
used it to plug the stream of blood rushing from my broken nose. 
Shocked and confused, I was unaware of how seriously I had been 
injured. 

My teacher looped his arm around my shoulder and we began the 
long walk to the nurse’s office: across the field, down the hill, and back 
into school. Random hands touched my sides, holding me upright. We 
took our time and walked slowly. Nobody realized that every minute 
mattered. 

When we arrived at the nurse’s office, she asked me a series of 
questions. 

“What year is it?” 

“1998,” I answered. It was actually 2002, 

“Who is the president of the United States?” 

“Bill Clinton,” I said. The correct answer was George W. Bush, 



“What is your mom’s name?” 

“Uh, Um,” I stalled. Ten seconds passed. 

“Patti,” I said casually, ignoring the fact that it had taken me ten 
seconds to remember my own mother’s name. 

That is the last question I remember. My body was unable to handle 
the rapid swelling in my brain and I lost consciousness before the 
ambulance arrived. Minutes later, I was carried out of school and taken 
to the local hospital. 

Shortly after arriving, my body began shutting down. I struggled 
with basic functions like swallowing and breathing. I had my first 
seizure of the day. Then I stopped breathing entirely. As the doctors 
hurried to supply me with oxygen, they also decided the local hospital 
was unequipped to handle the situation and ordered a helicopter to fly 
me to a larger hospital in Cincinnati. 

I was rolled out of the emergency room doors and toward the 
helipad across the street. The stretcher rattled on a bumpy sidewalk as 
one nurse pushed me along while another pumped each breath into me 
by hand. My mother, who had arrived at the hospital a few moments 
before, climbed into the helicopter beside me. I remained unconscious 
and unable to breathe on my own as she held my hand during the 
flight. 

While my mother rode with me in the helicopter, my father went 
home to check on my brother and sister and break the news to them. 
He choked back tears as he explained to my sister that he would miss 
her eighth-grade graduation ceremony that night. After passing my 
siblings off to family and friends, he drove to Cincinnati to meet my 
mother. 

When my mom and I landed on the roof of the hospital, a team of 
nearly twenty doctors and nurses sprinted onto the helipad and 
wheeled me into the trauma unit. By this time, the swelling in my brain 
had become so severe that I was having repeated post-traumatic 
seizures. My broken bones needed to be fixed, but I was in no 
condition to undergo surgery. After yet another seizure—my third of 
the day—I was put into a medically induced coma and placed on a 
ventilator. 

My parents were no strangers to this hospital. Ten years earlier, 
they had entered the same building on the ground floor after my sister 



was diagnosed with leukemia at age three. I was five at the time. My 
brother was just six months old. After two and a half years of 
chemotherapy treatments, spinal taps, and bone marrow biopsies, my 
little sister finally walked out of the hospital happy, healthy, and 
cancer free. And now, after ten years of normal life, my parents found 
themselves back in the same place with a different child. 

While I slipped into a coma, the hospital sent a priest and a social 
worker to comfort my parents. It was the same priest who had met 
with them a decade earlier on the evening they found out my sister had 
cancer. 

As day faded into night, a series of machines kept me alive. My 
parents slept restlessly on a hospital mattress—one moment they 
would collapse from fatigue, the next they would be wide awake with 
worry. My mother would tell me later, “It was one of the worst nights 
I’ve ever had.” 


MY RECOVERY 

Mercifully, by the next morning my breathing had rebounded to the 
point where the doctors felt comfortable releasing me from the coma. 
When I finally regained consciousness, I discovered that I had lost my 
ability to smell. As a test, a nurse asked me to blow my nose and sniff 
an apple juice box. My sense of smell returned, but—to everyone’s 
surprise—the act of blowing my nose forced air through the fractures 
in my eye socket and pushed my left eye outward. My eyeball bulged 
out of the socket, held precariously in place by my eyelid and the optic 
nerve attaching my eye to my brain. 

The ophthalmologist said my eye would gradually slide back into 
place as the air seeped out, but it was hard to tell how long this would 
take. I was scheduled for surgery one week later, which would allow me 
some additional time to heal. I looked like I had been on the wrong end 
of a boxing match, but I was cleared to leave the hospital. I returned 
home with a broken nose, half a dozen facial fractures, and a bulging 
left eye. 

The following months were hard. It felt like everything in my life 
was on pause. I had double vision for weeks; I literally couldn’t see 
straight. It took more than a month, but my eyeball did eventually 
return to its normal location. Between the seizures and my vision 



problems, it was eight months before I could drive a car again. At 
physical therapy, I practiced basic motor patterns like walking in a 
straight line. I was determined not to let my injury get me down, but 
there were more than a few moments when I felt depressed and 
overwhelmed, 

I became painfully aware of how far I had to go when I returned to 
the baseball field one year later. Baseball had always been a major part 
of my life. My dad had played minor league baseball for the St. Louis 
Cardinals, and I had a dream of playing professionally, too. After 
months of rehabilitation, what I wanted more than anything was to get 
back on the field. 

But my return to baseball was not smooth. When the season rolled 
around, I was the only junior to be cut from the varsity baseball team, I 
was sent down to play with the sophomores on junior varsity. I had 
been playing since age four, and for someone who had spent so much 
time and effort on the sport, getting cut was humiliating, I vividly 
remember the day it happened. I sat in my car and cried as I flipped 
through the radio, desperately searching for a song that would make 
me feel better. 

After a year of self-doubt, I managed to make the varsity team as a 
senior, but I rarely made it on the field. In total, I played eleven 
innings of high school varsity baseball, barely more than a single game. 

Despite my lackluster high school career, I still believed I could 
become a great player. And I knew that if things were going to 
improve, I was the one responsible for making it happen. The turning 
point came two years after my injury, when I began college at Denison 
University. It was a new beginning, and it was the place where I would 
discover the surprising power of small habits for the first time. 


HOW I LEARNED ABOUT HABITS 

Attending Denison was one of the best decisions of my life, I earned a 
spot on the baseball team and, although I was at the bottom of the 
roster as a freshman, I was thrilled. Despite the chaos of my high 
school years, I had managed to become a college athlete. 

I wasn’t going to be starting on the baseball team anytime soon, so I 
focused on getting my life in order. While my peers stayed up late and 

Natalia sold clips to 48 of her friends in April, and then she sold half as many clips in May. How many clips did Natalia sell altogether in April and May?
72
Natalia sold 48/2 = 24 clips in May.
Natalia sold 48+24 = 72 clips altogether in April and May.

Make a list of 10 ways to help students improve their study skills.

Output:1. Make a schedule for studying and stick to it.
2. Study in the same place every time.
3. Set goals for yourself.
4. Take breaks when you need them.
5. Don't cram before an exam.
6. Get enough sleep.
7. Eat healthy food.
8. Exercise regularly.
9. Find a study partner.
10. Reward yourself after completing a task.


Please solve the following equation for me: -5364 + 2209
-3155 is the solution

#Person1#: Hi, Mr. Smith. I'm Doctor Hawkins. Why are you here today?
#Person2#: I found it would be a good idea to get a check-up.
#Person1#: Yes, well, you haven't had one for 5 years. You should have one every year.
#Person2#: I know. I figure as long as there is nothing wrong, why go see the doctor?
#Person1#: Well, the best way to avoid serious illnesses is to find out about them early. So try to come at least once a year for your own good.
#Person2#: Ok.
#Person1#: Let me see here. Your eyes and ears look fine. Take a deep breath, please. Do you smoke, Mr. Smith?
#Person2#: Yes.
#Person1#: Smoking is the leading cause of lung cancer and heart disease, you know. You really should quit.
#Person2#: I've tried hundreds of times, but I just can't seem to kick the habit.
#Person1#: Well, we have classes and some medications that might help. I'll give you more information before you leave.
#Person2#: Ok, thanks doctor.

played video games, I built good sleep habits and went to bed early 
each night. In the messy world of a college dorm, I made a point to 
keep my room neat and tidy. These improvements were minor, but 
they gave me a sense of control over my life. I started to feel confident 
again. And this growing belief in myself rippled into the classroom as I 
improved my study habits and managed to earn straight A’s during my 
first year, 

A habit is a routine or behavior that is performed regularly—and, in 
many cases, automatically. As each semester passed, I accumulated 
small but consistent habits that ultimately led to results that were 
unimaginable to me when I started. For example, for the first time in 
my life, I made it a habit to lift weights multiple times per week, and in 
the years that followed, my six-foot-four-inch frame bulked up from a 
featherweight 170 to a lean 200 pounds. 

When my sophomore season arrived, I earned a starting role on the 
pitching staff. By my junior year, I was voted team captain and at the 
end of the season, I was selected for the all-conference team. But it was 
not until my senior season that my sleep habits, study habits, and 
strength-training habits really began to pay off. 

Six years after I had been hit in the face with a baseball bat, flown to 
the hospital, and placed into a coma, I was selected as the top male 
athlete at Denison University and named to the ESPN Academic All- 
America Team—an honor given to just thirty-three players across the 
country. By the time I graduated, I was listed in the school record 
books in eight different categories. That same year, I was awarded the 
university’s highest academic honor, the President’s Medal, 

I hope you’ll forgive me if this sounds boastful. To be honest, there 
was nothing legendary or historic about my athletic career. I never 
ended up playing professionally. However, looking back on those 
years, I believe I accomplished something just as rare: I fulfilled my 
potential. And I believe the concepts in this book can help you fulfill 
your potential as well. 

We all face challenges in life. This injury was one of mine, and the 
experience taught me a critical lesson: changes that seem small and 
unimportant at first will compound into remarkable results if you’re 
willing to stick with them for years. We all deal with setbacks but in the 
long run, the quality of our lives often depends on the quality of our 



habits. With the same habits, you’ll end up with the same results. But 
with better habits, anything is possible. 

Maybe there are people who can achieve incredible success 
overnight. I don’t know any of them, and I’m certainly not one of them. 
There wasn’t one defining moment on my journey from medically 
induced coma to Academic All-American; there were many. It was a 
gradual evolution, a long series of small wins and tiny breakthroughs. 
The only way I made progress—the only choice I had—was to start 
small. And I employed this same strategy a few years later when I 
started my own business and began working on this book. 


HOW AND WHY I WROTE THIS BOOK 

In November 2012 ,1 began publishing articles atjamesclear.com. For 
years, I had been keeping notes about my personal experiments with 
habits and I was finally ready to share some of them publicly. I began 
by publishing a new article every Monday and Thursday. Within a few 
months, this simple writing habit led to my first one thousand email 
subscribers, and by the end of 2013 that number had grown to more 
than thirty thousand people. 

In 2014, my email list expanded to over one hundred thousand 
subscribers, which made it one of the fastest-growing newsletters on 
the internet. I had felt like an impostor when I began writing two years 
earlier, but now I was becoming known as an expert on habits—a new 
label that excited me but also felt uncomfortable. I had never 
considered myself a master of the topic, but rather someone who was 
experimenting alongside my readers. 

In 2015 ,1 reached two hundred thousand email subscribers and 
signed a book deal with Penguin Random House to begin writing the 
book you are reading now. As my audience grew, so did my business 
opportunities. I was increasingly asked to speak at top companies 
about the science of habit formation, behavior change, and continuous 
improvement. I found myself delivering keynote speeches at 
conferences in the United States and Europe. 

In 2016, my articles began to appear regularly in major publications 
like Time, Entrepreneur, and Forbes. Incredibly, my writing was read 
by over eight million people that year. Coaches in the NFL, NBA, and 
MLB began reading my work and sharing it with their teams. 



At the start of 2017 ,1 launched the Habits Academy, which became 
the premier training platform for organizations and individuals 
interested in building better habits in life and work.* Fortune 500 
companies and growing start-ups began to enroll their leaders and 
train their staff. In total, over ten thousand leaders, managers, 
coaches, and teachers have graduated from the Habits Academy, and 
my work with them has taught me an incredible amount about what it 
takes to make habits work in the real world. 

As I put the finishing touches on this book in 2018, jamesclear.com 
is receiving millions of visitors per month and nearly five hundred 
thousand people subscribe to my weekly email newsletter—a number 
that is so far beyond my expectations when I began that I’m not even 
sure what to think of it. 


HOW THIS BOOK WILL BENEFIT YOU 

The entrepreneur and investor Naval Ravikant has said, “To write a 
great book, you must first become the book.” I originally learned about 
the ideas mentioned here because I had to live them. I had to rely on 
small habits to rebound from my injury, to get stronger in the gym, to 
perform at a high level on the field, to become a writer, to build a 
successful business, and simply to develop into a responsible adult. 
Small habits helped me fulfill my potential, and since you picked up 
this book. I’m guessing you’d like to fulfill yours as well. 

In the pages that follow, I will share a step-by-step plan for building 
better habits—not for days or weeks, but for a lifetime. While science 
supports everything I’ve written, this book is not an academic research 
paper; it’s an operating manual. You’ll find wisdom and practical 
advice front and center as I explain the science of how to create and 
change your habits in a way that is easy to understand and apply. 

The fields I draw on—biology, neuroscience, philosophy, 
psychology, and more—have been around for many years. What I offer 
you is a synthesis of the best ideas smart people figured out a long time 
ago as well as the most compelling discoveries scientists have made 
recently. My contribution, I hope, is to find the ideas that matter most 
and connect them in a way that is highly actionable. Anything wise in 
these pages you should credit to the many experts who preceded me. 
Anything foolish, assume it is my error. 


The backbone of this book is my four-step model of habits—cue, 
craving, response, and reward—and the four laws of behavior change 
that evolve out of these steps. Readers with a psychology background 
may recognize some of these terms from operant conditioning, which 
was first proposed as “stimulus, response, reward” by B, F. Skinner in 
the 1930s and has been popularized more recently as “cue, routine, 
reward” in The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg, 

Behavioral scientists like Skinner realized that if you offered the 
right reward or punishment, you could get people to act in a certain 
way. But while Skinner’s model did an excellent job of explaining how 
external stimuli influenced our habits, it lacked a good explanation for 
how our thoughts, feelings, and beliefs impact our behavior. Internal 
states—our moods and emotions—matter, too. In recent decades, 
scientists have begun to determine the connection between our 
thoughts, feelings, and behavior. This research will also be covered in 
these pages. 

In total, the framework I offer is an integrated model of the 
cognitive and behavioral sciences. I believe it is one of the first models 
of human behavior to accurately account for both the influence of 
external stimuli and internal emotions on our habits. While some of 
the language may be familiar, I am confident that the details—and the 
applications of the Four Laws of Behavior Change—will offer a new 
way to think about your habits. 

Human behavior is always changing: situation to situation, moment 
to moment, second to second. But this book is about what doesn’t 
change. It’s about the fundamentals of human behavior. The lasting 
principles you can rely on year after year. The ideas you can build a 
business around, build a family around, build a life around. 

There is no one right way to create better habits, but this book 
describes the best way I know—an approach that will be effective 
regardless of where you start or what you’re trying to change. The 
strategies I cover will be relevant to anyone looking for a step-by-step 
system for improvement, whether your goals center on health, money, 
productivity, relationships, or all of the above. As long as human 
behavior is involved, this book will be your guide. 



THE 

FUNDAMENTALS 

Why Tiny Changes Make a Big Difference 


1 


The Surprising Power of Atomic Habits 

T he fate of British Cycling changed one day in 2003, The 
organization, which was the governing body for professional 
cycling in Great Britain, had recently hired Dave Brailsford as its new 
performance director. At the time, professional cyclists in Great Britain 
had endured nearly one hundred years of mediocrity. Since 1908, 
British riders had won just a single gold medal at the Olympic Games, 
and they had fared even worse in cycling’s biggest race, the Tour de 
France. In no years, no British cyclist had ever won the event. 

In fact, the performance of British riders had been so 
underwhelming that one of the top bike manufacturers in Europe 
refused to sell bikes to the team because they were afraid that it would 
hurt sales if other professionals saw the Brits using their gear. 

Brailsford had been hired to put British Cycling on a new trajectory. 
What made him different from previous coaches was his relentless 
commitment to a strategy that he referred to as “the aggregation of 
marginal gains,” which was the philosophy of searching for a tiny 
margin of improvement in everything you do. Brailsford said, “The 
whole principle came from the idea that if you broke down everything 
you could think of that goes into riding a bike, and then improve it by 1 
percent, you will get a significant increase when you put them all 
together.” 

Brailsford and his coaches began by making small adjustments you 
might expect from a professional cycling team. They redesigned the 
bike seats to make them more comfortable and rubbed alcohol on the 
tires for a better grip. They asked riders to wear electrically heated 
overshorts to maintain ideal muscle temperature while riding and used 


biofeedback sensors to monitor how each athlete responded to a 
particular workout. The team tested various fabrics in a wind tunnel 
and had their outdoor riders switch to indoor racing suits, which 
proved to be lighter and more aerodynamic. 

But they didn’t stop there. Brailsford and his team continued to find 
1 percent improvements in overlooked and unexpected areas. They 
tested different types of massage gels to see which one led to the fastest 
muscle recovery. They hired a surgeon to teach each rider the best way 
to wash their hands to reduce the chances of catching a cold. They 
determined the type of pillow and mattress that led to the best night’s 
sleep for each rider. They even painted the inside of the team truck 
white, which helped them spot little bits of dust that would normally 
slip by unnoticed but could degrade the performance of the finely 
tuned bikes. 

As these and hundreds of other small improvements accumulated, 
the results came faster than anyone could have imagined. 

Just five years after Brailsford took over, the British Cycling team 
dominated the road and track cycling events at the 2008 Olympic 
Games in Beijing, where they won an astounding 60 percent of the 
gold medals available. Four years later, when the Olympic Games came 
to London, the Brits raised the bar as they set nine Olympic records 
and seven world records. 

That same year, Bradley Wiggins became the first British cyclist to 
win the Tour de France. The next year, his teammate Chris Froome 
won the race, and he would go on to win again in 2015, 2016, and 2017, 
giving the British team five Tour de France victories in six years. 

During the ten-year span from 2007 to 2017, British cyclists won 
178 world championships and sixty-six Olympic or Paralympic gold 
medals and captured five Tour de France victories in what is widely 
regarded as the most successful run in cycling history.* 

How does this happen? How does a team of previously ordinary 
athletes transform into world champions with tiny changes that, at 
first glance, would seem to make a modest difference at best? Why do 
small improvements accumulate into such remarkable results, and 
how can you replicate this approach in your own life? 


WHY SMALL HABITS MAKE A BIG DIFFERENCE 


It is so easy to overestimate the importance of one defining moment 
and underestimate the value of making small improvements on a daily 
basis. Too often, we convince ourselves that massive success requires 
massive action. Whether it is losing weight, building a business, 
writing a book, winning a championship, or achieving any other goal, 
we put pressure on ourselves to make some earth-shattering 
improvement that everyone will talk about. 

Meanwhile, improving by i percent isn’t particularly notable— 
sometimes it isn’t even noticeable—hut it can be far more meaningful, 
especially in the long run. The difference a tiny improvement can make 
over time is astounding, Here’s how the math works out: if you can get 
1 percent better each day for one year, you’ll end up thirty-seven times 
better by the time you’re done. Conversely, if you get i percent worse 
each day for one year, you’ll decline nearly down to zero. What starts 
as a small win or a minor setback accumulates into something much 
more. 


1% BETTER EVERY DAY 

1 % worse every day for one year. 0.99^®^ = 00.03 
1 % better every day for one year. 1.01 = 37.78 



1% IMPROVEMENT 



TIME 

FIGURE 1: The effects of small habits compound over time. For example, if 
you can get just 1 percent better each day, you’ll end up with results that are 
nearly 37 times better after one year. 


Habits are the compound interest of self-improvement. The same 
way that money multiplies through compound interest, the effects of 
your habits multiply as you repeat them. They seem to make little 
difference on any given day and yet the impact they deliver over the 
months and years can be enormous. It is only when looking back two, 
five, or perhaps ten years later that the value of good habits and the 
cost of bad ones becomes strikingly apparent. 

This can be a difficult concept to appreciate in daily life. We often 
dismiss small changes because they don’t seem to matter very much in 
the moment. If you save a little money now, you’re still not a 
millionaire. If you go to the gym three days in a row, you’re still out of 
shape. If you study Mandarin for an hour tonight, you still haven’t 
learned the language. We make a few changes, but the results never 
seem to come quickly and so we slide back into our previous routines. 

Unfortunately, the slow pace of transformation also makes it easy to 
let a bad habit slide. If you eat an unhealthy meal today, the scale 
doesn’t move much. If you work late tonight and ignore your family. 








they will forgive you. If you procrastinate and put your project off until 
tomorrow, there will usually be time to finish it later, A single decision 
is easy to dismiss. 

But when we repeat i percent errors, day after day, by replicating 
poor decisions, duplicating tiny mistakes, and rationalizing little 
excuses, our small choices compound into toxic results. It’s the 
accumulation of many missteps—a i percent decline here and there— 
that eventually leads to a problem. 

The impact created by a change in your habits is similar to the effect 
of shifting the route of an airplane by just a few degrees. Imagine you 
are flying from Los Angeles to New York City, If a pilot leaving from 
LAX adjusts the heading just 3.5 degrees south, you will land in 
Washington, D.C., instead of New York. Such a small change is barely 
noticeable at takeoff—the nose of the airplane moves just a few feet— 
but when magnified across the entire United States, you end up 
hundreds of miles apart.* 

Similarly, a slight change in your daily habits can guide your life to a 
very different destination. Making a choice that is 1 percent better or 1 
percent worse seems insignificant in the moment, but over the span of 
moments that make up a lifetime these choices determine the 
difference between who you are and who you could be. Success is the 
product of daily habits—not once-in-a-lifetime transformations. 

That said, it doesn’t matter how successful or unsuccessful you are 
right now. What matters is whether your habits are putting you on the 
path toward success. You should be far more concerned with your 
current trajectory than with your current results. If you’re a millionaire 
but you spend more than you earn each month, then you’re on a bad 
trajectory. If your spending habits don’t change, it’s not going to end 
well. Conversely, if you’re broke, but you save a little bit every month, 
then you’re on the path toward financial freedom—even if you’re 
moving slower than you’d like. 

Your outcomes are a lagging measure of your habits. Your net worth 
is a lagging measure of your financial habits. Your weight is a lagging 
measure of your eating habits. Your knowledge is a lagging measure of 
your learning habits. Your clutter is a lagging measure of your cleaning 
habits. You get what you repeat. 


If you want to predict where you’ll end up in life, all you have to do 
is follow the curve of tiny gains or tiny losses, and see how your daily 
choices will compound ten or twenty years down the line. Are you 
spending less than you earn each month? Are you making it into the 
gym each week? Are you reading books and learning something new 
each day? Tiny battles like these are the ones that will define your 
future self. 

Time magnifies the margin between success and failure. It will 
multiply whatever you feed it. Good habits make time your ally. Bad 
habits make time your enemy. 

Habits are a double-edged sword. Bad habits can cut you down just 
as easily as good habits can build you up, which is why understanding 
the details is crucial. You need to know how habits work and how to 
design them to your liking, so you can avoid the dangerous half of the 
blade. 


YOUR HABITS CAN COMPOUND FOR YOU OR AGAINST YOU 


Positive Compounding 


Productivity compounds. Accomplishing one extra task is a small feat on any given day, 
but it counts for a lot over an entire career. The effect of automating an old task or mastering 
a new skill can be even greater. The more tasks you can handle without thinking, the more 
your brain is free to focus on other areas. 

Knowledge compounds. Learning one new idea won’t make you a genius, but a 
commitment to lifelong learning can be transformative. Furthermore, each book you read not 
only teaches you something new but also opens up different ways of thinking about old 
ideas. As Warren Buffett says, “That’s how knowledge works. It builds up, like compound 
interest.” 

Relationships compound. People reflect your behavior back to you. The more you help 
others, the more others want to help you. Being a little bit nicer in each interaction can result 
in a network of broad and strong connections over time. 


Negative Compounding 


Stress compounds. The frustration of a traffic jam. The weight of parenting responsibilities. 
The worry of making ends meet. The strain of slightly high blood pressure. By themselves, 
these common causes of stress are manageable. But when they persist for years, little 
stresses compound into serious health issues. 

Negative thoughts compound. The more you think of yourself as worthless, stupid, or ugly, 
the more you condition yourself to interpret life that way. You get trapped in a thought loop. 
The same is true for how you think about others. Once you fall into the habit of seeing people 
as angry, unjust, or selfish, you see those kind of people everywhere. 

Outrage compounds. Riots, protests, and mass movements are rarely the result of a single 
event. Instead, a long series of microaggressions and daily aggravations slowly multiply until 
one event tips the scales and outrage spreads like wildfire. 










WHAT PROGRESS IS REALLY LIKE 


Imagine that you have an ice cube sitting on the table in front of you. 
The room is cold and you can see your breath. It is currently twenty- 
five degrees. Ever so slowly, the room begins to heat up. 

Twenty-six degrees. 

Twenty-seven, 

Twenty-eight. 

The ice cube is still sitting on the table in front of you. 

Twenty-nine degrees. 

Thirty, 

Thirty-one, 

Still, nothing has happened. 

Then, thirty-two degrees. The ice begins to melt. A one-degree shift, 
seemingly no different from the temperature increases before it, has 
unlocked a huge change. 

Breakthrough moments are often the result of many previous 
actions, which build up the potential required to unleash a major 
change. This pattern shows up everywhere. Cancer spends 8o percent 
of its life undetectable, then takes over the body in months. Bamboo 
can barely be seen for the first five years as it builds extensive root 
systems underground before exploding ninety feet into the air within 
six weeks. 

Similarly, habits often appear to make no difference until you cross 
a critical threshold and unlock a new level of performance. In the early 
and middle stages of any quest, there is often a Valley of 
Disappointment. You expect to make progress in a linear fashion and 
it’s frustrating how ineffective changes can seem during the first days, 
weeks, and even months. It doesn’t feel like you are going anywhere. 
It’s a hallmark of any compounding process: the most powerful 
outcomes are delayed. 

This is one of the core reasons why it is so hard to build habits that 
last. People make a few small changes, fail to see a tangible result, and 
decide to stop. You think, “I’ve been running every day for a month, so 
why can’t I see any change in my body?” Once this kind of thinking 



takes over, it’s easy to let good habits fall by the wayside. But in order 
to make a meaningful difference, habits need to persist long enough to 
break through this plateau—what I call the Plateau of Latent Potential. 

If you find yourself struggling to build a good habit or break a bad 
one, it is not because you have lost your ability to improve. It is often 
because you have not yet crossed the Plateau of Latent Potential. 
Complaining about not achieving success despite working hard is like 
complaining about an ice cube not melting when you heated it from 
twenty-five to thirty-one degrees. Your work was not wasted; it is just 
being stored. All the action happens at thirty-two degrees. 

When you finally break through the Plateau of Latent Potential, 
people will call it an overnight success. The outside world only sees the 
most dramatic event rather than all that preceded it. But you know that 
it’s the work you did long ago—when it seemed that you weren’t 
making any progress—that makes the jump today possible. 

It is the human equivalent of geological pressure. Two tectonic 
plates can grind against one another for millions of years, the tension 
slowly building all the while. Then, one day, they rub each other once 
again, in the same fashion they have for ages, but this time the tension 
is too great. An earthquake erupts. Change can take years—before it 
happens all at once. 

Mastery requires patience. The San Antonio Spurs, one of the most 
successful teams in NBA history, have a quote from social reformer 
Jacob Riis hanging in their locker room: “When nothing seems to help, 
I go and look at a stonecutter hammering away at his rock, perhaps a 
hundred times without as much as a crack showing in it. Yet at the 
hundred and first blow it will split in two, and I know it was not that 
last blow that did it—but all that had gone before.” 


THE PLATEAU OF LATENT POTENTIAL 




DISAPPOINTMENT 

FIGURE 2: We often expect progress to be linear. At the very least, we hope 
it will come quickly. In reality, the results of our efforts are often delayed. It is 
not until months or years later that we realize the true value of the previous 
work we have done. This can result in a “valley of disappointment” where 
people feel discouraged after putting in weeks or months of hard work 
without experiencing any results. However, this work was not wasted. It was 
simply being stored. It is not until much later that the full value of previous 
efforts is revealed. 


All big things come from small beginnings. The seed of every habit 
is a single, tiny decision. But as that decision is repeated, a habit 
sprouts and grows stronger. Roots entrench themselves and branches 
grow. The task of breaking a bad habit is like uprooting a powerful oak 
within us. And the task of building a good habit is like cultivating a 
delicate flower one day at a time. 

But what determines whether we stick with a habit long enough to 
survive the Plateau of Latent Potential and break through to the other 
side? What is it that causes some people to slide into unwanted habits 
and enables others to enjoy the compounding effects of good ones? 


FORGET ABOUT GOALS, FOCUS ON SYSTEMS INSTEAD 

Prevailing wisdom claims that the best way to achieve what we want in 
life—getting into better shape, building a successful business, relaxing 
more and worrying less, spending more time with friends and family— 
is to set specific, actionable goals. 




For many years, this was how I approached my habits, too. Each one 
was a goal to be reached. I set goals for the grades I wanted to get in 
school, for the weights I wanted to lift in the gym, for the profits I 
wanted to earn in business. I succeeded at a few, but I failed at a lot of 
them. Eventually, I began to realize that my results had very little to do 
with the goals I set and nearly everything to do with the systems I 
followed. 

What’s the difference between systems and goals? It’s a distinction I 
first learned from Scott Adams, the cartoonist behind the Dilbert 
comic. Goals are about the results you want to achieve. Systems are 
about the processes that lead to those results. 

■ If you’re a coach, your goal might be to win a championship. Your 
system is the way you recruit players, manage your assistant 
coaches, and conduct practice. 

■ If you’re an entrepreneur, your goal might be to build a million- 
dollar business. Your system is how you test product ideas, hire 
employees, and run marketing campaigns. 

■ If you’re a musician, your goal might be to play a new piece. Your 
system is how often you practice, how you break down and tackle 
difficult measures, and your method for receiving feedback from 
your instructor. 

Now for the interesting question: If you completely ignored your 
goals and focused only on your system, would you still succeed? Eor 
example, if you were a basketball coach and you ignored your goal to 
win a championship and focused only on what your team does at 
practice each day, would you still get results? 

I think you would. 

The goal in any sport is to finish with the best score, but it would be 
ridiculous to spend the whole game staring at the scoreboard. The only 
way to actually win is to get better each day. In the words of three-time 
Super Bowl winner Bill Walsh, “The score takes care of itself.” The 
same is true for other areas of life. If you want better results, then 
forget about setting goals. Focus on your system instead. 

What do I mean by this? Are goals completely useless? Of course 
not. Goals are good for setting a direction, but systems are best for 



making progress. A handful of problems arise when you spend too 
much time thinking about your goals and not enough time designing 
your systems. 


Problem #1: Winners and losers have the same goals. 

Goal setting suffers from a serious case of survivorship bias. We 
concentrate on the people who end up winning—the survivors—and 
mistakenly assume that ambitious goals led to their success while 
overlooking all of the people who had the same objective but didn’t 
succeed. 

Every Olympian wants to win a gold medal. Every candidate wants 
to get the job. And if successful and unsuccessful people share the 
same goals, then the goal cannot be what differentiates the winners 
from the losers. It wasn’t the goal of winning the Tour de France that 
propelled the British cyclists to the top of the sport. Presumably, they 
had wanted to win the race every year before—just like every other 
professional team. The goal had always been there. It was only when 
they implemented a system of continuous small improvements that 
they achieved a different outcome. 


Problem #2: Achieving a goal is only a momentary change. 

Imagine you have a messy room and you set a goal to clean it. If you 
summon the energy to tidy up, then you will have a clean room—for 
now. But if you maintain the same sloppy, pack-rat habits that led to a 
messy room in the first place, soon you’ll be looking at a new pile of 
clutter and hoping for another burst of motivation. You’re left chasing 
the same outcome because you never changed the system behind it. 
You treated a symptom without addressing the cause. 

Achieving a goal only changes your life/or the moment. That’s the 
counterintuitive thing about improvement. We think we need to 
change our results, but the results are not the problem. What we really 
need to change are the systems that cause those results. When you 
solve problems at the results level, you only solve them temporarily. In 
order to improve for good, you need to solve problems at the systems 
level. Fix the inputs and the outputs will fix themselves. 



Problem #3: Goals restrict your happiness. 


The implicit assumption behind any goal is this: “Once I reach my goal, 
then I’ll be happy.” The problem with a goals-first mentality is that 
you’re continually putting happiness off until the next milestone. I’ve 
slipped into this trap so many times I’ve lost count. For years, 
happiness was always something for my future self to enjoy. I 
promised myself that once I gained twenty pounds of muscle or after 
my business was featured in the New York Times, then I could finally 
relax. 

Furthermore, goals create an “either-or” conflict: either you achieve 
your goal and are successful or you fail and you are a disappointment. 
You mentally box yourself into a narrow version of happiness. This is 
misguided. It is unlikely that your actual path through life will match 
the exact journey you had in mind when you set out. It makes no sense 
to restrict your satisfaction to one scenario when there are many paths 
to success. 

A systems-first mentality provides the antidote. When you fall in 
love with the process rather than the product, you don’t have to wait to 
give yourself permission to be happy. You can be satisfied anytime 
your system is running. And a system can be successful in many 
different forms, not just the one you first envision. 


Problem #4: Goals are at odds with long-term progress. 

Finally, a goal-oriented mind-set can create a “yo-yo” effect. Many 
runners work hard for months, but as soon as they cross the finish line, 
they stop training. The race is no longer there to motivate them. When 
all of your hard work is focused on a particular goal, what is left to 
push you forward after you achieve it? This is why many people find 
themselves reverting to their old habits after accomplishing a goal. 

The purpose of setting goals is to win the game. The purpose of 
building systems is to continue playing the game. True long-term 
thinking is goal-less thinking. It’s not about any single 
accomplishment. It is about the cycle of endless refinement and 
continuous improvement. Ultimately, it is your commitment to the 
proeess that will determine your propress. 



A SYSTEM OF ATOMIC HABITS 


If you’re having trouble changing your habits, the problem isn’t you. 
The problem is your system. Bad habits repeat themselves again and 
again not because you don’t want to change, but because you have the 
wrong system for change. 

You do not rise to the level of your goals. You fall to the level of your 
systems. 

Focusing on the overall system, rather than a single goal, is one of 
the core themes of this book. It is also one of the deeper meanings 
behind the word atomic. By now, you’ve probably realized that an 
atomic habit refers to a tiny change, a marginal gain, a i percent 
improvement. But atomic habits are not just any old habits, however 
small. They are little habits that are part of a larger system. Just as 
atoms are the building blocks of molecules, atomic habits are the 
building blocks of remarkable results. 

Habits are like the atoms of our lives. Each one is a fundamental 
unit that contributes to your overall improvement. At first, these tiny 
routines seem insignificant, but soon they build on each other and fuel 
bigger wins that multiply to a degree that far outweighs the cost of 
their initial investment. They are both small and mighty. This is the 
meaning of the phrase atomic habits—a regular practice or routine 
that is not only small and easy to do, but also the source of incredible 
power; a component of the system of compound growth. 

Chapter Summary 

■ Habits are the compound interest of self-improvement. Getting i 
percent better every day counts for a lot in the long-run, 

■ Habits are a double-edged sword. They can work for you or 
against you, which is why understanding the details is essential. 

■ Small changes often appear to make no difference until you cross 
a critical threshold. The most powerful outcomes of any 
compounding process are delayed. You need to be patient. 

■ An atomic habit is a little habit that is part of a larger system. Just 
as atoms are the building blocks of molecules, atomic habits are 
the building blocks of remarkable results. 



If you want better results, then forget about setting goals. Focus 
on your system instead. 

You do not rise to the level of your goals. You fall to the level of 
your systems. 



2 


How Your Habits Shape Your Identity (and 

Vice Versa) 

W HY IS IT SO easy to repeat bad habits and so hard to form good 
ones? Few things can have a more powerful impact on your life 
than improving your daily habits. And yet it is likely that this time next 
year you’ll be doing the same thing rather than something better. 

It often feels difficult to keep good habits going for more than a few 
days, even with sincere effort and the occasional burst of motivation. 
Habits like exercise, meditation, journaling, and cooking are 
reasonable for a day or two and then become a hassle. 

However, once your habits are established, they seem to stick 
around forever—especially the unwanted ones. Despite our best 
intentions, unhealthy habits like eating junk food, watching too much 
television, procrastinating, and smoking can feel impossible to break. 

Changing our habits is challenging for two reasons: (i) we try to 
change the wrong thing and (2) we try to change our habits in the 
wrong way. In this chapter. I’ll address the first point. In the chapters 
that follow. I’ll answer the second. 

Our first mistake is that we try to change the wrong thing. To 
understand what I mean, consider that there are three levels at which 
change can occur. You can imagine them like the layers of an onion. 


THREE LAYERS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE 


OUTCOMES 



PROCESSES 


IDENTITY 


FIGURE 3: There are three layers of behavior change: a change in your 
outcomes, a change in your processes, or a change in your identity. 


The first layer is changing your outcomes. This level is 
concerned with changing your results: losing weight, publishing a 
book, winning a championship. Most of the goals you set are 
associated with this level of change. 

The second layer is changing your process. This level is 
concerned with changing your habits and systems: implementing a 
new routine at the gym, decluttering your desk for better workflow, 
developing a meditation practice. Most of the habits you build are 
associated with this level. 

The third and deepest layer is changing your identity. This 
level is concerned with changing your beliefs: your worldview, your 
self-image, your judgments about yourself and others. Most of the 
beliefs, assumptions, and biases you hold are associated with this level. 

Outcomes are about what you get. Processes are about what you do. 
Identity is about what you believe. When it comes to building habits 
that last—when it comes to building a system of i percent 
improvements—the problem is not that one level is “better” or “worse” 
than another. All levels of change are useful in their own way. The 
problem is the direction of change. 

Many people begin the process of changing their habits by focusing 
on what they want to achieve. This leads us to outcome-based habits. 
The alternative is to build identity-based habits. With this approach, 
we start by focusing on who we wish to become. 


OUTCOME-BASED HABITS 




FIGURE 4: With outcome-based habits, the focus is on what you want to 
achieve. With identity-based habits, the focus is on who you wish to 
become. 

Imagine two people resisting a cigarette. When offered a smoke, the 
first person says, “No thanks. I’m trying to quit.” It sounds like a 
reasonable response, but this person still believes they are a smoker 
who is trying to be something else. They are hoping their behavior will 
change while carrying around the same beliefs. 

The second person declines by saying, “No thanks. I’m not a 
smoker.” It’s a small difference, but this statement signals a shift in 
identity. Smoking was part of their former life, not their current one. 
They no longer identify as someone who smokes. 

Most people don’t even consider identity change when they set out 
to improve. They just think, “I want to be skinny (outcome) and if I 
stick to this diet, then I’ll be skinny (process).” They set goals and 
determine the actions they should take to achieve those goals without 
considering the beliefs that drive their actions. They never shift the 




way they look at themselves, and they don’t realize that their old 
identity can sabotage their new plans for change. 

Behind every system of actions are a system of beliefs. The system of 
a democracy is founded on beliefs like freedom, majority rule, and 
social equality. The system of a dictatorship has a very different set of 
beliefs like absolute authority and strict obedience. You can imagine 
many ways to try to get more people to vote in a democracy, but such 
behavior change would never get off the ground in a dictatorship. 

That’s not the identity of the system. Voting is a behavior that is 
impossible under a certain set of beliefs. 

A similar pattern exists whether we are discussing individuals, 
organizations, or societies. There are a set of beliefs and assumptions 
that shape the system, an identity behind the habits. 

Behavior that is incongruent with the self will not last. You may 
want more money, but if your identity is someone who consumes 
rather than creates, then you’ll continue to be pulled toward spending 
rather than earning. You may want better health, but if you continue to 
prioritize comfort over accomplishment, you’ll be drawn to relaxing 
rather than training. It’s hard to change your habits if you never 
change the underlying beliefs that led to your past behavior. You have 
a new goal and a new plan, but you haven’t changed who you are. 

The story of Brian Clark, an entrepreneur from Boulder, Colorado, 
provides a good example. “For as long as I can remember. I’ve chewed 
my fingernails,” Clark told me. “It started as a nervous habit when I 
was young, and then morphed into an undesirable grooming ritual. 

One day, I resolved to stop chewing my nails until they grew out a bit. 
Through mindful willpower alone, I managed to do it.” 

Then, Clark did something surprising. 

“I asked my wife to schedule my first-ever manicure,” he said. “My 
thought was that if I started paying to maintain my nails, I wouldn’t 
chew them. And it worked, but not for the monetary reason. What 
happened was the manicure made my fingers look really nice for the 
first time. The manicurist even said that—other than the chewing—I 
had really healthy, attractive nails. Suddenly, I was proud of my 
fingernails. And even though that’s something I had never aspired to, it 
made all the difference. I’ve never chewed my nails since; not even a 



single close call. And it’s because I now take pride in properly caring 
for them.” 

The ultimate form of intrinsic motivation is when a habit becomes 
part of your identity. It’s one thing to say I’m the type of person who 
wants this. It’s something very different to say I’m the type of person 
who is this. 

The more pride you have in a particular aspect of your identity, the 
more motivated you will be to maintain the habits associated with it. If 
you’re proud of how your hair looks, you’ll develop all sorts of habits to 
care for and maintain it. If you’re proud of the size of your biceps, 
you’ll make sure you never skip an upper-body workout. If you’re 
proud of the scarves you knit, you’ll be more likely to spend hours 
knitting each week. Once your pride gets involved, you’ll fight tooth 
and nail to maintain your habits. 

True behavior change is identity change. You might start a habit 
because of motivation, but the only reason you’ll stick with one is that 
it becomes part of your identity. Anyone can convince themselves to 
visit the gym or eat healthy once or twice, but if you don’t shift the 
belief behind the behavior, then it is hard to stick with long-term 
changes. Improvements are only temporary until they become part of 
who you are. 

■ The goal is not to read a book, the goal is to become a reader. 

■ The goal is not to run a marathon, the goal is to become a runner. 

■ The goal is not to learn an instrument, the goal is to become a 
musician. 

Your behaviors are usually a reflection of your identity. What you do 
is an indication of the type of person you believe that you are—either 
consciously or nonconsciously.* Research has shown that once a 
person believes in a particular aspect of their identity, they are more 
likely to act in alignment with that belief. For example, people who 
identified as “being a voter” were more likely to vote than those who 
simply claimed “voting” was an action they wanted to perform. 
Similarly, the person who incorporates exercise into their identity 
doesn’t have to convince themselves to train. Doing the right thing is 
easy. After all, when your behavior and your identity are fully aligned. 


you are no longer pursuing behavior change. You are simply acting like 
the type of person you already believe yourself to be. 

Like all aspects of habit formation, this, too, is a double-edged 
sword. When working for you, identity change can be a powerful force 
for self-improvement. When working against you, though, identity 
change can be a curse. Once you have adopted an identity, it can be 
easy to let your allegiance to it impact your ability to change. Many 
people walk through life in a cognitive slumber, blindly following the 
norms attached to their identity. 

■ “I’m terrible with directions.” 

■ “I’m not a morning person.” 

■ “I’m bad at remembering people’s names.” 

■ “I’m always late.” 

■ “I’m not good with technology.” 

■ “I’m horrible at math.” 

... and a thousand other variations. 

When you have repeated a story to yourself for years, it is easy to 
slide into these mental grooves and accept them as a fact. In time, you 
begin to resist certain actions because “that’s not who I am.” There is 
internal pressure to maintain your self-image and behave in a way that 
is consistent with your beliefs. You find whatever way you can to avoid 
contradicting yourself. 

The more deeply a thought or action is tied to your identity, the 
more difficult it is to change it. It can feel comfortable to believe what 
your culture believes (group identity) or to do what upholds your self- 
image (personal identity), even if it’s wrong. The biggest barrier to 
positive change at any level—individual, team, society—is identity 
conflict. Good habits can make rational sense, but if they conflict with 
your identity, you will fail to put them into action. 

On any given day, you may struggle with your habits because you’re 
too busy or too tired or too overwhelmed or hundreds of other reasons. 
Over the long run, however, the real reason you fail to stick with habits 
is that your self-image gets in the way. This is why you can’t get too 
attached to one version of your identity. Progress requires unlearning. 



Becoming the best version of yourself requires you to continuously edit 
your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your identity. 

This brings us to an important question: If your beliefs and 
worldview play such an important role in your behavior, where do they 
come from in the first place? How, exactly, is your identity formed? 
And how can you emphasize new aspects of your identity that serve 
you and gradually erase the pieces that hinder you? 


THE TWO-STEP PROCESS TO CHANGING YOUR IDENTITY 

Your identity emerges out of your habits. You are not born with preset 
beliefs. Every belief, including those about yourself, is learned and 
conditioned through experience.* 

More precisely, your habits are how you embody your identity. 
When you make your bed each day, you embody the identity of an 
organized person. When you write each day, you embody the identity 
of a creative person. When you train each day, you embody the identity 
of an athletic person. 

The more you repeat a behavior, the more you reinforce the identity 
associated with that behavior. In fact, the word identity was originally 
derived from the Latin words essentitas, which means being, and 
identidem, which means repeatedly. Your identity is literally your 
“repeated beingness.” 

Whatever your identity is right now, you only believe it because you 
have proof of it. If you go to church every Sunday for twenty years, you 
have evidence that you are religious. If you study biology for one hour 
every night, you have evidence that you are studious. If you go to the 
gym even when it’s snowing, you have evidence that you are committed 
to fitness. The more evidence you have for a belief, the more strongly 
you will believe it. 

For most of my early life, I didn’t consider myself a writer. If you 
were to ask any of my high school teachers or college professors, they 
would tell you I was an average writer at best: certainly not a standout. 
When I began my writing career, I published a new article every 
Monday and Thursday for the first few years. As the evidence grew, so 
did my identity as a writer. I didn’t start out as a writer. I became one 
through my habits. 


Of course, your habits are not the only actions that influence your 
identity, but by virtue of their frequency they are usually the most 
important ones. Each experience in life modifies your self-image, but 
it’s unlikely you would consider yourself a soccer player because you 
kicked a ball once or an artist because you scribbled a picture. As you 
repeat these actions, however, the evidence accumulates and your self- 
image begins to change. The effect of one-off experiences tends to fade 
away while the effect of habits gets reinforced with time, which means 
your habits contribute most of the evidence that shapes your identity. 
In this way, the process of building habits is actually the process of 
becoming yourself. 

This is a gradual evolution. We do not change by snapping our 
fingers and deciding to be someone entirely new. We change bit by bit, 
day by day, habit by habit. We are continually undergoing 
microevolutions of the self. 

Each habit is like a suggestion: “Hey, maybe this is who I am.” If you 
finish a book, then perhaps you are the type of person who likes 
reading. If you go to the gym, then perhaps you are the type of person 
who likes exercise. If you practice playing the guitar, perhaps you are 
the type of person who likes music. 

Every action you take is a vote for the type of person you wish to 
become. No single instance will transform your beliefs, but as the votes 
build up, so does the evidence of your new identity. This is one reason 
why meaningful change does not require radical change. Small habits 
can make a meaningful difference by providing evidence of a new 
identity. And if a change is meaningful, it actually is big. That’s the 
paradox of making small improvements. 

Putting this all together, you can see that habits are the path to 
changing your identity. The most practical way to change who you are 
is to change what you do. 

■ Each time you write a page, you are a writer. 

■ Each time you practice the violin, you are a musician. 

■ Each time you start a workout, you are an athlete. 

■ Each time you encourage your employees, you are a leader. 



Each habit not only gets results but also teaches you something far 
more important: to trust yourself. You start to believe you can actually 
accomplish these things. When the votes mount up and the evidence 
begins to change, the story you tell yourself begins to change as well. 

Of course, it works the opposite way, too. Every time you choose to 
perform a bad habit, it’s a vote for that identity. The good news is that 
you don’t need to be perfect. In any election, there are going to be votes 
for both sides. You don’t need a unanimous vote to win an election; 
you just need a majority. It doesn’t matter if you cast a few votes for a 
bad behavior or an unproductive habit. Your goal is simply to win the 
majority of the time. 

New identities require new evidence. If you keep casting the same 
votes you’ve always cast, you’re going to get the same results you’ve 
always had. If nothing changes, nothing is going to change. 

It is a simple two-step process: 

1. Decide the type of person you want to be. 

2. Prove it to yourself with small wins. 

First, decide who you want to be. This holds at any level—as an 
individual, as a team, as a community, as a nation. What do you want 
to stand for? What are your principles and values? Who do you wish to 
become? 

These are big questions, and many people aren’t sure where to begin 
—but they do know what kind of results they want: to get six-pack abs 
or to feel less anxious or to double their salary. That’s fine. Start there 
and work backward from the results you want to the type of person 
who could get those results. Ask yourself, “Who is the type of person 
that could get the outcome I want?” Who is the type of person that 
could lose forty pounds? Who is the type of person that could learn a 
new language? Who is the type of person that could run a successful 
start-up? 

For example, “Who is the type of person who could write a book?” 
It’s probably someone who is consistent and reliable. Now your focus 
shifts from writing a book (outcome-based) to being the type of person 
who is consistent and reliable (identity-based). 

This process can lead to beliefs like: 



“I’m the kind of teacher who stands up for her students,” 


■ “I’m the kind of doctor who gives each patient the time and 
empathy they need.” 

■ “I’m the kind of manager who advocates for her employees,” 

Once you have a handle on the type of person you want to be, you 
can begin taking small steps to reinforce your desired identity. I have a 
friend who lost over loo pounds by asking herself, “What would a 
healthy person do?” All day long, she would use this question as a 
guide. Would a healthy person walk or take a cab? Would a healthy 
person order a burrito or a salad? She figured if she acted like a healthy 
person long enough, eventually she would become that person. She 
was right. 

The concept of identity-based habits is our first introduction to 
another key theme in this book: feedback loops. Your habits shape 
your identity, and your identity shapes your habits. It’s a two-way 
street. The formation of all habits is a feedback loop (a concept we will 
explore in depth in the next chapter), but it’s important to let your 
values, principles, and identity drive the loop rather than your results. 
The focus should always be on becoming that type of person, not 
getting a particular outcome. 


THE REAL REASON HABITS MATTER 

Identity change is the North Star of habit change. The remainder of 
this book will provide you with step-by-step instructions on how to 
build better habits in yourself, your family, your team, your company, 
and anywhere else you wish. But the true question is: “Are you 
becoming the type of person you want to become?” The first step is not 
what or how, but who. You need to know who you want to be. 
Otherwise, your quest for change is like a boat without a rudder. And 
that’s why we are starting here. 

You have the power to change your beliefs about yourself. Your 
identity is not set in stone. You have a choice in every moment. You 
can choose the identity you want to reinforce today with the habits you 
choose today. And this brings us to the deeper purpose of this book 
and the real reason habits matter. 



Building better habits isn’t about littering your day with life hacks. 
It’s not about flossing one tooth each night or taking a cold shower 
each morning or wearing the same outfit each day. It’s not about 
achieving external measures of success like earning more money, 
losing weight, or reducing stress. Habits can help you achieve all of 
these things, but fundamentally they are not about having something. 
They are about becoming someone. 

Ultimately, your habits matter because they help you become the 
type of person you wish to be. They are the channel through which you 
develop your deepest beliefs about yourself. Quite literally, you become 
your habits. 

Chapter Summary 

■ There are three levels of change: outcome change, process change, 
and identity change. 

■ The most effective way to change your habits is to focus not on 
what you want to achieve, but on who you wish to become. 

■ Your identity emerges out of your habits. Every action is a vote for 
the type of person you wish to become. 

■ Becoming the best version of yourself requires you to 
continuously edit your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your 
identity. 

■ The real reason habits matter is not because they can get you 
better results (although they can do that), but because they can 
change your beliefs about yourself. 



3 


How to Build Better Habits in 4 Simple 

Steps 

I N 1898, A psychologist named Edward Thorndike conducted an 
experiment that would lay the foundation for our understanding of 
how habits form and the rules that guide our behavior, Thorndike was 
interested in studying the behavior of animals, and he started by 
working with cats. 

He would place each cat inside a device known as a puzzle box. The 
box was designed so that the cat could escape through a door “by some 
simple act, such as pulling at a loop of cord, pressing a lever, or 
stepping on a platform,” For example, one box contained a lever that, 
when pressed, would open a door on the side of the box. Once the door 
had been opened, the cat could dart out and run over to a bowl of food. 

Most cats wanted to escape as soon as they were placed inside the 
box. They would poke their nose into the corners, stick their paws 
through openings, and claw at loose objects. After a few minutes of 
exploration, the cats would happen to press the magical lever, the door 
would open, and they would escape, 

Thorndike tracked the behavior of each cat across many trials. In 
the beginning, the animals moved around the box at random. But as 
soon as the lever had been pressed and the door opened, the process of 
learning began. Gradually, each cat learned to associate the action of 
pressing the lever with the reward of escaping the box and getting to 
the food. 

After twenty to thirty trials, this behavior became so automatic and 
habitual that the cat could escape within a few seconds. For example. 


Thorndike noted, “Cat 12 took the following times to perform the act, 
160 seconds, 30 seconds, 90 seconds, 60,15, 28, 20, 30, 22,11,15, 20, 
12,10,14,10, 8, 8, 5,10, 8, 6, 6, 7.” 

During the first three trials, the cat escaped in an average of 1.5 
minutes. During the last three trials, it escaped in an average of 6.3 
seconds. With practice, each cat made fewer errors and their actions 
became quicker and more automatic. Rather than repeat the same 
mistakes, the cat began to cut straight to the solution. 

From his studies, Thorndike described the learning process by 
stating, “behaviors followed by satisfying consequences tend to be 
repeated and those that produce unpleasant consequences are less 
likely to be repeated.” His work provides the perfect starting point for 
discussing how habits form in our own lives. It also provides answers 
to some fundamental questions like: What are habits? And why does 
the brain bother building them at all? 


WHY YOUR BRAIN BUILDS HABITS 

A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times to become 
automatic. The process of habit formation begins with trial and error. 
Whenever you encounter a new situation in life, your brain has to 
make a decision. How do I respond to this? The first time you come 
across a problem, you’re not sure how to solve it. Like Thorndike’s cat, 
you’re just trying things out to see what works. 

Neurological activity in the brain is high during this period. You are 
carefully analyzing the situation and making conscious decisions about 
how to act. You’re taking in tons of new information and trying to 
make sense of it all. The brain is busy learning the most effective 
course of action. 

Occasionally, like a cat pressing on a lever, you stumble across a 
solution. You’re feeling anxious, and you discover that going for a run 
calms you down. You’re mentally exhausted from a long day of work, 
and you learn that playing video games relaxes you. You’re exploring, 
exploring, exploring, and then—BAM—a reward. 

After you stumble upon an unexpected reward, you alter your 
strategy for next time. Your brain immediately begins to catalog the 



events that preceded the reward. Wait a minute—that felt good. What 
did I do right before that? 

This is the feedback loop behind all human behavior: try, fail, learn, 
try differently. With practice, the useless movements fade away and 
the useful actions get reinforced. That’s a habit forming. 

Whenever you face a problem repeatedly, your brain begins to 
automate the process of solving it. Your habits are just a series of 
automatic solutions that solve the problems and stresses you face 
regularly. As behavioral scientist Jason Hreha writes, “Habits are, 
simply, reliable solutions to recurring problems in our environment.” 

As habits are created, the level of activity in the brain deereases. 

You learn to lock in on the cues that predict success and tune out 
everything else. When a similar situation arises in the future, you know 
exactly what to look for. There is no longer a need to analyze every 
angle of a situation. Your brain skips the process of trial and error and 
creates a mental rule: if this, then that. These cognitive scripts can be 
followed automatically whenever the situation is appropriate. Now, 
whenever you feel stressed, you get the itch to run. As soon as you walk 
in the door from work, you grab the video game controller. A choice 
that once required effort is now automatic. A habit has been created. 

Habits are mental shortcuts learned from experience. In a sense, a 
habit is just a memory of the steps you previously followed to solve a 
problem in the past. Whenever the conditions are right, you can draw 
on this memory and automatically apply the same solution. The 
primary reason the brain remembers the past is to better predict what 
will work in the future. 

Habit formation is incredibly useful because the conscious mind is 
the bottleneck of the brain. It can only pay attention to one problem at 
a time. As a result, your brain is always working to preserve your 
conscious attention for whatever task is most essential. Whenever 
possible, the conscious mind likes to pawn off tasks to the 
nonconscious mind to do automatically. This is precisely what happens 
when a habit is formed. Habits reduce cognitive load and free up 
mental capacity, so you can allocate your attention to other tasks. 

Despite their efficiency, some people still wonder about the benefits 
of habits. The argument goes like this: “Will habits make my life dull? I 
don’t want to pigeonhole myself into a lifestyle I don’t enjoy. Doesn’t 



so much routine take away the vibrancy and spontaneity of life?” 
Hardly. Such questions set up a false dichotomy. They make you think 
that you have to choose between building habits and attaining 
freedom. In reality, the two complement each other. 

Habits do not restrict freedom. They create it. In fact, the people 
who don’t have their habits handled are often the ones with the least 
amount of freedom. Without good financial habits, you will always be 
struggling for the next dollar. Without good health habits, you will 
always seem to be short on energy. Without good learning habits, you 
will always feel like you’re behind the curve. If you’re always being 
forced to make decisions about simple tasks—when should I work out, 
where do I go to write, when do I pay the bills—then you have less time 
for freedom. It’s only by making the fundamentals of life easier that 
you can create the mental space needed for free thinking and 
creativity. 

Conversely, when you have your habits dialed in and the basics of 
life are handled and done, your mind is free to focus on new challenges 
and master the next set of problems. Building habits in the present 
allows you to do more of what you want in the future. 


THE SCIENCE OF HOW HABITS WORK 

The process of building a habit can be divided into four simple steps: 
cue, craving, response, and reward.* Breaking it down into these 
fundamental parts can help us understand what a habit is, how it 
works, and how to improve it. 


1 CUE 

1 CRAVING 

1 RESPONSE I 

REWARD 1 

1 1 

1 2 

1 3 1 

4 1 


TIME- > 

FIGURE 5: All habits proceed through four stages in the same order: cue, 
craving, response, and reward. 


This four-step pattern is the backbone of every habit, and your brain 
runs through these steps in the same order each time. 




First, there is the cue. The cue triggers your brain to initiate a 
behavior. It is a bit of information that predicts a reward. Our 
prehistoric ancestors were paying attention to cues that signaled the 
location of primary rewards like food, water, and sex. Today, we spend 
most of our time learning cues that predict secondary rewards like 
money and fame, power and status, praise and approval, love and 
friendship, or a sense of personal satisfaction, (Of course, these 
pursuits also indirectly improve our odds of survival and reproduction, 
which is the deeper motive behind everything we do.) 

Your mind is continuously analyzing your internal and external 
environment for hints of where rewards are located. Because the cue is 
the first indication that we’re close to a reward, it naturally leads to a 
craving. 

Cravings are the second step, and they are the motivational force 
behind every habit. Without some level of motivation or desire— 
without craving a change—we have no reason to act. What you crave is 
not the habit itself but the change in state it delivers. You do not crave 
smoking a cigarette, you crave the feeling of relief it provides. You are 
not motivated by brushing your teeth but rather by the feeling of a 
clean mouth. You do not want to turn on the television, you want to be 
entertained. Every craving is linked to a desire to change your internal 
state. This is an important point that we will discuss in detail later. 

Cravings differ from person to person. In theory, any piece of 
information could trigger a craving, but in practice, people are not 
motivated by the same cues. For a gambler, the sound of slot machines 
can be a potent trigger that sparks an intense wave of desire. For 
someone who rarely gambles, the jingles and chimes of the casino are 
just background noise. Cues are meaningless until they are interpreted. 
The thoughts, feelings, and emotions of the observer are what 
transform a cue into a craving. 

The third step is the response. The response is the actual habit you 
perform, which can take the form of a thought or an action. Whether a 
response occurs depends on how motivated you are and how much 
friction is associated with the behavior. If a particular action requires 
more physical or mental effort than you are willing to expend, then you 
won’t do it. Your response also depends on your ability. It sounds 
simple, but a habit can occur only if you are capable of doing it. If you 



want to dunk a basketball but can’t jump high enough to reach the 
hoop, well, you’re out of luck. 

Finally, the response delivers a reward. Rewards are the end goal of 
every habit. The cue is about noticing the reward. The craving is about 
wanting the reward. The response is about obtaining the reward. We 
chase rewards because they serve two purposes: (i) they satisfy us and 
(2) they teach us. 

The first purpose of rewards is to satisfy your craving. Yes, rewards 
provide benefits on their own. Food and water deliver the energy you 
need to survive. Getting a promotion brings more money and respect. 
Getting in shape improves your health and your dating prospects. But 
the more immediate benefit is that rewards satisfy your craving to eat 
or to gain status or to win approval. At least for a moment, rewards 
deliver contentment and relief from craving. 

Second, rewards teach us which actions are worth remembering in 
the future. Your brain is a reward detector. As you go about your life, 
your sensory nervous system is continuously monitoring which actions 
satisfy your desires and deliver pleasure. Feelings of pleasure and 
disappointment are part of the feedback mechanism that helps your 
brain distinguish useful actions from useless ones. Rewards close the 
feedback loop and complete the habit cycle. 

If a behavior is insufficient in any of the four stages, it will not 
become a habit. Eliminate the cue and your habit will never start. 
Reduce the craving and you won’t experience enough motivation to 
act. Make the behavior difficult and you won’t be able to do it. And if 
the reward fails to satisfy your desire, then you’ll have no reason to do 
it again in the future. Without the first three steps, a behavior will not 
occur. Without all four, a behavior will not be repeated. 


THE HABIT LOOP 




FIGURE 6: The four stages of habit are best described as a feedback loop. 
They form an endless cycle that is running every moment you are alive. This 
“habit loop” is continually scanning the environment, predicting what will 
happen next, trying out different responses, and learning from the results.! 


In summary, the cue triggers a craving, which motivates a response, 
which provides a reward, which satisfies the craving and, ultimately, 
becomes associated with the cue. Together, these four steps form a 
neurological feedback loop—cue, craving, response, reward; cue, 
craving, response, reward—that ultimately allows you to create 
automatic habits. This cycle is known as the habit loop. 

This four-step process is not something that happens occasionally, 
but rather it is an endless feedback loop that is running and active 
during every moment you are alive—even now. The brain is continually 
scanning the environment, predicting what will happen next, trying 
out different responses, and learning from the results. The entire 
process is completed in a split second, and we use it again and again 
without realizing everything that has been packed into the previous 
moment. 

We can split these four steps into two phases: the problem phase 
and the solution phase. The problem phase includes the cue and the 
craving, and it is when you realize that something needs to change. The 
solution phase includes the response and the reward, and it is when 
you take action and achieve the change you desire. 




Problem phase 



All behavior is driven by the desire to solve a problem. Sometimes 
the problem is that you notice something good and you want to obtain 
it. Sometimes the problem is that you are experiencing pain and you 
want to relieve it. Either way, the purpose of every habit is to solve the 
problems you face. 

In the table on the following page, you can see a few examples of 
what this looks like in real life. 

Imagine walking into a dark room and flipping on the light switch. 
You have performed this simple habit so many times that it occurs 
without thinking. You proceed through all four stages in the fraction of 
a second. The urge to act strikes you without thinking. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: Your phone buzzes with a new text message. 

2. Craving: You want to learn the contents of the message. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You grab your phone and read the text. 

4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to read the message. Grabbing your phone becomes 

associated with your phone buzzing. 

I I 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: You are answering emails. 

2. Craving: You begin to feel stressed and overwhelmed by work. You want to feel in control. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You bite your nails. 

4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to reduce stress. Biting your nails becomes associated 

with answering email. 

I I 



Solution phase 































3. Response: You drink a cup of coffee. 

4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to feel alert. Drinking coffee becomes associated with 

waking up. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: You smell a doughnut shop as you walk down the street near your office. 

2. Craving: You begin to crave a doughnut. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You buy a doughnut and eat it. 

4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to eat a doughnut. Buying a doughnut becomes 

associated with walking down the street near your office. 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: You hit a stumbling block on a project at work. 

2. Craving: You feel stuck and want to relieve your frustration. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You pull out your phone and check social media. 

4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to feel relieved. Checking social media becomes 

associated with feeling stalled at work. 

I I 


Problem phase 


1. Cue: You walk into a dark room. 

2. Craving: You want to be able to see. 


Solution phase 


3. Response: You flip the light switch. 

4. Reward: You satisfy your craving to see. Turning on the light switch becomes associated 

with being in a dark room. 

By the time we become adults, we rarely notice the habits that are 
running our lives. Most of us never give a second thought to the fact 
that we tie the same shoe first each morning, or unplug the toaster 
after each use, or always change into comfortable clothes after getting 
home from work. After decades of mental programming, we 
automatically slip into these patterns of thinking and acting. 


THE FOUR LAWS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE 

In the following chapters, we will see time and again how the four 
stages of cue, craving, response, and reward influence nearly 
everything we do each day. But before we do that, we need to 





























transform these four steps into a practical framework that we can use 
to design good habits and eliminate bad ones. 

I refer to this framework as the Four Laws of Behavior Change, and 
it provides a simple set of rules for creating good habits and breaking 
bad ones. You can think of each law as a lever that influences human 
behavior. When the levers are in the right positions, creating good 
habits is effortless. When they are in the wrong positions, it is nearly 
impossible. 


How to Create a Good Habit 


The 1st law (Cue): Make it obvious. 

The 2nd law (Craving): Make it attractive. 

The 3rd law (Response): Make it easy. 

The 4th law (Reward): Make it satisfying. 

We can invert these laws to learn how to break a bad habit. 

I I 


How to Break a Bad Habit 


Inversion of the 1st law (Cue): Make it invisible. 

Inversion of the 2nd law (Craving): Make it unattractive. 

Inversion of the 3rd law (Response): Make it difficult. 

Inversion of the 4th law (Reward): Make it unsatisfying. 

It would be irresponsible for me to claim that these four laws are an 
exhaustive framework for changing any human behavior, but I think 
they’re close. As you will soon see, the Four Laws of Behavior Change 
apply to nearly every field, from sports to politics, art to medicine, 
comedy to management. These laws can be used no matter what 
challenge you are facing. There is no need for completely different 
strategies for each habit. 

Whenever you want to change your behavior, you can simply ask 
yourself: 

1. How can I make it obvious? 

2. How can I make it attractive? 

3. How can I make it easy? 

4. How can I make it satisfying? 












If you have ever wondered, “Why don’t I do what I say I’m going to 
do? Why don’t I lose the weight or stop smoking or save for retirement 
or start that side business? Why do I say something is important but 
never seem to make time for it?” The answers to those questions can be 
found somewhere in these four laws. The key to creating good habits 
and breaking bad ones is to understand these fundamental laws and 
how to alter them to your specifications. Every goal is doomed to fail if 
it goes against the grain of human nature. 

Your habits are shaped by the systems in your life. In the chapters 
that follow, we will discuss these laws one by one and show how you 
can use them to create a system in which good habits emerge naturally 
and bad habits wither away. 

Chapter Summary 

■ A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times to 
become automatic. 

■ The ultimate purpose of habits is to solve the problems of life with 
as little energy and effort as possible. 

■ Any habit can be broken down into a feedback loop that involves 
four steps: cue, craving, response, and reward. 

■ The Four Laws of Behavior Change are a simple set of rules we 
can use to build better habits. They are (i) make it obvious, (2) 
make it attractive, (3) make it easy, and (4) make it satisfying. 



THE 1ST LAW 


Make It Obvious 


4 


The Man Who Didn’t Look Right 

The psychologist Gary Klein once told me a story about a woman who 
attended a family gathering. She had spent years working as a 
paramedic and, upon arriving at the event, took one look at her father- 
in-law and got very concerned. 

“I don’t like the way you look,” she said. 

Her father-in-law, who was feeling perfectly fine, jokingly replied, 
“Well, I don’t like your looks, either.” 

“No,” she insisted. “You need to go to the hospital now.” 

A few hours later, the man was undergoing lifesaving surgery after 
an examination had revealed that he had a blockage to a major artery 
and was at immediate risk of a heart attack. Without his daughter-in- 
law’s intuition, he could have died. 

What did the paramedic see? How did she predict his impending 
heart attack? 

When major arteries are obstructed, the body focuses on sending 
blood to critical organs and away from peripheral locations near the 
surface of the skin. The result is a change in the pattern of distribution 
of blood in the face. After many years of working with people with 
heart failure, the woman had unknowingly developed the ability to 
recognize this pattern on sight. She couldn’t explain what it was that 
she noticed in her father-in-law’s face, but she knew something was 
wrong. 

Similar stories exist in other fields. For example, military analysts 
can identify which blip on a radar screen is an enemy missile and 


which one is a plane from their own fleet even though they are 
traveling at the same speed, flying at the same altitude, and look 
identical on radar in nearly every respect. During the Gulf War, 
Lieutenant Commander Michael Riley saved an entire battleship when 
he ordered a missile shot down—despite the fact that it looked exactly 
like the battleship’s own planes on radar. He made the right call, but 
even his superior officers couldn’t explain how he did it. 

Museum curators have been known to discern the difference 
between an authentic piece of art and an expertly produced counterfeit 
even though they can’t tell you precisely which details tipped them off. 
Experienced radiologists can look at a brain scan and predict the area 
where a stroke will develop before any obvious signs are visible to the 
untrained eye. I’ve even heard of hairdressers noticing whether a client 
is pregnant based only on the feel of her hair. 


import torch
import torch.nn as nn
import math
from torch.nn import functional as F


class InputEmbedding(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, d_model, vocab_size):
        super().__init__()
        self.d_model = d_model
        self.vocab_size = vocab_size

        # creates a 2d list for the vocab size and the d_model
        self.embedding = nn.Embedding(vocab_size, d_model)

    def forward(self, x):
        return self.embedding(x) * math.sqrt(self.d_model)  # multiply by sqrt of dmodel


def rotate_half(x):
    """Rotate half the hidden dims of the input."""
    x1 = x[..., : x.shape[-1] // 2]
    x2 = x[..., x.shape[-1] // 2 :]
    return torch.cat((-x2, x1), dim=-1)


class RotaryEmbedding(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim, max_seq_len=2048, base=10000):
        super().__init__()
        assert dim % 2 == 0, "RoPE requires even dimension"

        # Compute inverse frequencies
        inv_freq = 1.0 / (base ** (torch.arange(0, dim, 2).float() / dim))
        self.register_buffer("inv_freq", inv_freq)
        
        # Precompute for max_seq_len (optional optimization)
        self._seq_len_cached = max_seq_len
        positions = torch.arange(max_seq_len).float()
        freqs = torch.einsum("i,j->ij", positions, inv_freq)  # (seq_len, dim//2)
        
        # Duplicate freqs for complex-valued rotation
        emb = torch.cat([freqs, freqs], dim=-1)  # (seq_len, dim)
        
        self.register_buffer("cos_cached", emb.cos()[None, None, :, :])  # (1, 1, seq, dim)
        self.register_buffer("sin_cached", emb.sin()[None, None, :, :])

    def forward(self, q, k, seq_len):
        # If seq_len exceeds cache, recompute
        if seq_len > self._seq_len_cached:
            positions = torch.arange(seq_len, device=q.device).float()
            freqs = torch.einsum("i,j->ij", positions, self.inv_freq)
            emb = torch.cat([freqs, freqs], dim=-1)
            cos = emb.cos()[None, None, :, :]
            sin = emb.sin()[None, None, :, :]
        else:
            cos = self.cos_cached[:, :, :seq_len, :]
            sin = self.sin_cached[:, :, :seq_len, :]
        
        # Apply rotary embeddings
        q_embed = (q * cos) + (rotate_half(q) * sin)
        k_embed = (k * cos) + (rotate_half(k) * sin)
        
        return q_embed, k_embed



class PositionalEncoding(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, d_model, seq_len, dropout, device=None):
        super().__init__()

        if device is None:
            device = torch.device("cpu")

        self.device = device
        self.d_model = d_model
        self.seq_len = seq_len
        self.dropout = nn.Dropout(dropout)

        # create 2d list of size (seq_len,d_model)

        self.pos_enc = torch.zeros(seq_len, d_model).to(device)

        # create list of size seq_len
        position = torch.arange(0, seq_len, dtype=torch.float).unsqueeze(1).to(device)  # (seq_len,1)
        denominator = torch.exp(torch.arange(0, d_model, 2).float() * (-math.log(10000.0) / d_model)).to(device)

        # apply the formula
        # apply sin to the even of pos

        self.pos_enc[:, 0::2] = torch.sin(position * denominator)
        self.pos_enc[:, 1::2] = torch.cos(position * denominator)

        # batching so reshape
        self.pos_enc = self.pos_enc.unsqueeze(0)  # (1,seq_len,d_model)

        self.register_buffer('pos_enc_buffer', self.pos_enc)

    def forward(self, x):
        if x.shape[1] < self.seq_len:
            sliced_pos_enc = self.pos_enc[:, :x.shape[0], :]
        else:
            sliced_pos_enc = self.pos_enc[:, :x.shape[1], :]

        # print(x.shape)
        # print(self.pos_enc.shape)
        # print(sliced_pos_enc.shape)

        x = x + sliced_pos_enc.requires_grad_(False)

        return self.dropout(x)
"""
LayerNorm

    Normalizes using mean + variance
    Removes both scale and bias
    Slightly more expensive
    Very stable across many tasks
    Use if Small 

RMSNorm

    Normalizes using root mean square only
    Keeps the mean (no centering)
    Cheaper (fewer ops)
    Preserves signal magnitude better
"""
class RMSNorm(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, d_model, eps=1e-6):
        super().__init__()
        self.eps = eps
        self.weight = nn.Parameter(torch.ones(d_model))
    
    def forward(self, x):
        rms = torch.sqrt(x.pow(2).mean(-1, keepdim=True) + self.eps)
        return self.weight * x / rms

class LayerNormalization(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, d_model, epsilon=10 ** -6, bias=True):
        super().__init__()

        self.use_bias=bias

        self.eps = epsilon

        self.alpha = nn.Parameter(torch.ones(d_model))  # multiplied
        self.bias = nn.Parameter(torch.zeros(d_model)) if bias else None # added

    def forward(self, x):
        mean = x.mean(dim=-1, keepdim=True)
        std = x.std(dim=-1, keepdim=True)
        normalized = (x - mean) / (std + self.eps)
        if self.use_bias:
            return self.alpha * normalized  + self.bias
        return self.alpha * normalized

#better than GELU (idk)
# class SwiGLU(nn.Module):
#     def forward(self, x):
#         x, gate = x.chunk(2, dim=-1)
#         return F.silu(gate) * x

# class FeedForwardNet(nn.Module):
#     def __init__(self, d_model, dff, dropout, activation="relu"):
#         super().__init__()

#         # self.linear1 = nn.Linear(d_model, dff)

        

#         # self.linear2 = nn.Linear(dff, d_model)

#         # if activation=="gelu":
#         #     self.activation = nn.GELU()
#         # elif activation=="swiglu":
#         #     self.activation = SwiGLU()
#         # else:
#         #     self.activation = nn.ReLU()

#         if activation == "swiglu":
#             self.linear1 = nn.Linear(d_model, 2 * dff)
#             self.activation = SwiGLU()
#             self.linear2 = nn.Linear(dff, d_model)
#         else:
#             self.linear1 = nn.Linear(d_model, dff)
#             self.activation = nn.GELU() if activation == "gelu" else nn.ReLU()
#             self.linear2 = nn.Linear(dff, d_model)

#         self.dropout = nn.Dropout(dropout)

#     def forward(self, x):
#         return self.linear2(self.dropout(self.activation(self.linear1(x))))

class FeedForwardNet(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, d_model, dff, dropout, activation="gelu", bias=False):
        super().__init__()
        
        if activation == "swiglu":
            # For parameter parity with standard FFN of hidden dim 4*d_model:
            # SwiGLU uses (8/3)*d_model ≈ 2.67*d_model
            self.w1 = nn.Linear(d_model, dff, bias=bias)  # Gate
            self.w3 = nn.Linear(d_model, dff, bias=bias)  # Value
            self.w2 = nn.Linear(dff, d_model, bias=bias)  # Down
            self.activation_fn = F.silu
            self.use_swiglu = True
        else:
            self.linear1 = nn.Linear(d_model, dff, bias=bias)
            self.linear2 = nn.Linear(dff, d_model, bias=bias)
            self.activation_fn = F.gelu if activation == "gelu" else F.relu
            self.use_swiglu = False
        
        self.dropout = nn.Dropout(dropout)
    
    def forward(self, x):
        if self.use_swiglu:
            # SwiGLU: silu(W1 @ x) ⊙ (W3 @ x)
            return self.w2(self.dropout(self.activation_fn(self.w1(x)) * self.w3(x)))
        else:
            return self.linear2(self.dropout(self.activation_fn(self.linear1(x))))


class MultiHeadBlock(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, d_model, n_heads, dropout, use_flash_attn=False):
        super().__init__()

        self.d_model = d_model
        self.n_heads = n_heads
        self.dropout = nn.Dropout(dropout)

        assert d_model % n_heads == 0, "d_model mod n_heads not equal to zero"

        self.d_k = d_model // n_heads

        self.rope = RotaryEmbedding(self.d_k)


        self.w_q = nn.Linear(d_model, d_model)
        self.w_k = nn.Linear(d_model, d_model)
        self.w_v = nn.Linear(d_model, d_model)

        self.w_o = nn.Linear(d_model, d_model)

        self.use_flash_attn = use_flash_attn and hasattr(torch.nn.functional, 'scaled_dot_product_attention')


    @staticmethod
    def attention(query, key, value, mask, dropout: nn.Dropout):
        d_k = query.shape[-1]

        attention_scores = (query @ key.transpose(-2, -1)) / math.sqrt(d_k)

        if mask is not None:
            attention_scores.masked_fill_(mask == 0, -1e9)

        attention_scores = attention_scores.softmax(dim=-1)

        if dropout is not None:
            attention_scores = dropout(attention_scores)

        return attention_scores @ value

    # def forward(self, q, k, v, mask):
    #     query = self.w_q(q)
    #     key = self.w_k(k)
    #     value = self.w_v(v)

    #     query = query.view(query.shape[0], query.shape[1], self.n_heads, self.d_k).transpose(1, 2)
    #     key = key.view(key.shape[0], key.shape[1], self.n_heads, self.d_k).transpose(1, 2)
    #     value = value.view(value.shape[0], value.shape[1], self.n_heads, self.d_k).transpose(1, 2)

    #     x = MultiHeadBlock.attention(query, key, value, mask, self.dropout)

    #     x = x.transpose(1, 2).contiguous().view(x.shape[0], -1, self.n_heads * self.d_k)

    #     return self.w_o(x)

    def forward(self, q, k, v, mask):
        query = self.w_q(q)
        key = self.w_k(k)
        value = self.w_v(v)
        
        query = query.view(query.shape[0], query.shape[1], self.n_heads, self.d_k).transpose(1, 2)
        key = key.view(key.shape[0], key.shape[1], self.n_heads, self.d_k).transpose(1, 2)
        value = value.view(value.shape[0], value.shape[1], self.n_heads, self.d_k).transpose(1, 2)

        seq_len = query.shape[-2]
        query, key = self.rope(query, key, seq_len)
        
        # Use Flash Attention if available (PyTorch 2.0+)
        if self.use_flash_attn:
            # Convert mask format for scaled_dot_product_attention
            # attn_mask = None
            # if mask is not None:
            #     attn_mask = mask.bool() if mask.dtype != torch.bool else mask
            
            x = torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention(
                query, key, value, 
                attn_mask=None,
                dropout_p=self.dropout.p if self.training else 0.0,
                is_causal=True  # We provide our own mask
            )
        else:
            # Fallback to manual attention
            x = MultiHeadBlock.attention(query, key, value, mask, self.dropout)
        
        x = x.transpose(1, 2).contiguous().view(x.shape[0], -1, self.n_heads * self.d_k)
        return self.w_o(x)


class ResidualConn(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dropout, d_model, bias=True,norm="layernorm"):
        super().__init__()

        self.dropout = nn.Dropout(dropout)
        if norm=="layernorm":
            self.norm = LayerNormalization(d_model,bias=bias)
        else:
            self.norm = RMSNorm(d_model)

    def forward(self, x, sub_layer):
        return x + self.dropout(sub_layer(self.norm(x)))


class EncoderBlock(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, self_attention_block: MultiHeadBlock, feed_forward_block: FeedForwardNet, dropout, d_model,bias=True,norm="layernorm"):
        super().__init__()

        self.attention_block = self_attention_block
        self.feed_forward_block = feed_forward_block

        self.residual_conn = nn.ModuleList([ResidualConn(dropout, d_model,bias=bias,norm=norm) for _ in range(2)])

    def forward(self, x, src_mask):
        x = self.residual_conn[0](x, lambda x: self.attention_block(x, x, x, src_mask))
        x = self.residual_conn[1](x, self.feed_forward_block)

        return x


class Encoder(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, layers: nn.ModuleList, d_model,bias=True,norm="layernorm"):
        super().__init__()

        self.layers = layers
        if norm=="layernorm":
            self.norm = LayerNormalization(d_model,bias=bias)
        else:
            self.norm = RMSNorm(d_model)

    def forward(self, x, mask):
        for layer in self.layers:
            x = layer(x, mask)

        return self.norm(x)


class DecoderBlock(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, self_attention: MultiHeadBlock, cross_attention: MultiHeadBlock, feed_forward_block, dropout, d_model,
                 bias=True, norm="layernorm"):
        super().__init__()

        self.self_attention = self_attention
        self.cross_attention = cross_attention
        self.feed_forward = feed_forward_block

        self.residual_conns = nn.ModuleList([ResidualConn(dropout,d_model,bias=bias,norm=norm) for _ in range(3)])

    def forward(self, x, encoder_output, src_mask, trgt_mask):
        x = self.residual_conns[0](x, lambda x: self.self_attention(x, x, x, trgt_mask))
        x = self.residual_conns[1](x, lambda x: self.cross_attention(x, encoder_output, encoder_output, src_mask))
        x = self.residual_conns[2](x, self.feed_forward)
        return x

#modified decoder block(removed cross attention) used for decoder only transformer
class DecoderOnlyBlock(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, self_attention: MultiHeadBlock, feed_forward_block, dropout, d_model,bias=True,norm="layernorm"):
        super().__init__()

        self.self_attention = self_attention
        self.feed_forward = feed_forward_block

        self.residual_conns = nn.ModuleList([ResidualConn(dropout,d_model,bias=bias,norm=norm) for _ in range(2)])

    def forward(self, x, trgt_mask):
        x = self.residual_conns[0](x, lambda x: self.self_attention(x, x, x, trgt_mask))
        x = self.residual_conns[1](x, self.feed_forward)
        return x


class Decoder(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, layers: nn.ModuleList, d_model, bias=True,norm="layernorm"):
        super().__init__()

        self.layers = layers
        if norm=="layernorm":
            self.norm = LayerNormalization(d_model,bias=bias)
        else:
            self.norm = RMSNorm(d_model)

    def forward(self, x, encoder_out, src_mask, trgt_mask):
        for layer in self.layers:
            x = layer(x, encoder_out, src_mask, trgt_mask)
        return self.norm(x)

#used mainly for the decoder only transformer
class DecoderOnly(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, layers: nn.ModuleList, d_model,bias=True,norm="layernorm"):
        super().__init__()

        self.layers = layers
        if norm=="layernorm":
            self.norm = LayerNormalization(d_model,bias=bias)
        else:
            self.norm = RMSNorm(d_model)

    def forward(self, x, mask):
        for layer in self.layers:
            x = layer(x, mask)
        return self.norm(x)


class ProjectionLayer(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, d_model, vocab_size):
        super().__init__()

        self.projection_layer = nn.Linear(d_model, vocab_size)

    def forward(self, x):
        return self.projection_layer(x)


#full encoder + decoder
class Transformer(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, encoder: Encoder, decoder: Decoder,
                 src_embed: InputEmbedding, trgt_embed: InputEmbedding,
                #  src_pos: PositionalEncoding, trgt_pos: PositionalEncoding,
                 projection_layer: ProjectionLayer):
        super().__init__()

        self.encoder = encoder
        self.decoder = decoder
        self.src_embed = src_embed
        self.trgt_embed = trgt_embed
        # self.src_pos = src_pos
        # self.trgt_pos = trgt_pos
        self.proj = projection_layer

    def encode(self, src, src_mask):
        src = self.src_embed(src)
        # src = self.src_pos(src)
        return self.encoder(src, src_mask)

    def decode(self, encoder_out, src_mask, trgt, trgt_mask):
        trgt = self.trgt_embed(trgt)
        # trgt = self.trgt_pos(trgt)
        return self.decoder(trgt, encoder_out, src_mask, trgt_mask)

    def project(self, x):
        return self.proj(x)


class TransformerEncoderOnly(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, encoder: Encoder,
                 src_embed: InputEmbedding,
                #  src_pos: PositionalEncoding,
                 projection_layer: ProjectionLayer):
        super().__init__()

        self.encoder = encoder
        self.src_embed = src_embed
        # self.src_pos = src_pos
        self.proj = projection_layer

    def encode(self, src, src_mask):
        src = self.src_embed(src)
        # src = self.src_pos(src)
        return self.encoder(src, src_mask)

    def project(self, x):
        return self.proj(x)
    


class TransformerDecoderOnly(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, decoder, embed, projection):
        super().__init__()
        self.decoder = decoder
        self.embed = embed
        # self.pos = pos
        self.proj = projection

        #weight tying
        self.proj.projection_layer.weight=self.embed.embedding.weight

    def forward(self, x, mask):
        x = self.embed(x)
        # x = self.pos(x)
        x = self.decoder(x, mask)
        return self.proj(x)



#decoder only transformer (used for next token prediction)
def build_transformer_next_token(
    vocab_size,
    d_model=512,
    n_layers=6,
    n_heads=8,
    dropout=0.1,
    dff=2048,
    device=None
):
    embed = InputEmbedding(d_model, vocab_size)
    # pos = PositionalEncoding(d_model, seq_len, dropout, device=device)

    decoder_blocks = []
    for _ in range(n_layers):
        self_attn = MultiHeadBlock(d_model, n_heads, dropout,use_flash_attn=True)
        ff = FeedForwardNet(d_model, dff, dropout,activation="swiglu")
        decoder_blocks.append(DecoderOnlyBlock(self_attn, ff, dropout, d_model, bias=False,norm="rms"))

    decoder = DecoderOnly(nn.ModuleList(decoder_blocks), d_model,bias=False,norm="rms")
    projection = ProjectionLayer(d_model, vocab_size)

    model = TransformerDecoderOnly(decoder, embed, projection)

    for p in model.parameters():
        if p.dim() > 1:
            nn.init.xavier_uniform_(p)

    return model


#encoder only
def build_transformer_encoder(src_vocab_size, trgt_vocab_size, src_seq_length, d_model=512, n_layers=6,
                          n_heads=8, dropout=0.1, dff=2048, device=None):
    # create embed layers
    src_embed = InputEmbedding(d_model, src_vocab_size)

    # position encoders
    # src_pos = PositionalEncoding(d_model, src_seq_length, dropout, device=device)

    # encoder_blocks
    encoder_blocks = []
    for _ in range(n_layers):
        encoder_self_attention_block = MultiHeadBlock(d_model, n_heads, dropout)
        feed_f_block = FeedForwardNet(d_model, dff, dropout)
        encoder_block = EncoderBlock(encoder_self_attention_block, feed_f_block, dropout, d_model)
        encoder_blocks.append(encoder_block)

    # encoder decoder
    encoder = Encoder(nn.ModuleList(encoder_blocks),d_model)

    # project layer
    projection_layer = ProjectionLayer(d_model, trgt_vocab_size)

    transformer = TransformerEncoderOnly(encoder, src_embed, projection_layer)

    for p in transformer.parameters():
        if p.dim() > 1:
            nn.init.xavier_uniform_(p)

    return transformer


# encoder + decoder architecture
def build_transformer(src_vocab_size, trgt_vocab_size, src_seq_length, trgt_seq_length, d_model=512, n_layers=6,
                      n_heads=8, dropout=0.1, dff=2048, device=None):
    # create embed layers
    src_embed = InputEmbedding(d_model, src_vocab_size)
    trgt_embed = InputEmbedding(d_model, trgt_vocab_size)

    # position encoders
    # src_pos = PositionalEncoding(d_model, src_seq_length, dropout, device=device)

    # trgt_pos = PositionalEncoding(d_model, trgt_seq_length, dropout, device=device)

    # encoder_blocks
    encoder_blocks = []
    for _ in range(n_layers):
        encoder_self_attention_block = MultiHeadBlock(d_model, n_heads, dropout)
        feed_f_block = FeedForwardNet(d_model, dff, dropout)
        encoder_block = EncoderBlock(encoder_self_attention_block, feed_f_block, dropout, d_model)
        encoder_blocks.append(encoder_block)

    # decoder_blocks
    decoder_blocks = []
    for _ in range(n_layers):
        decoder_self_attention_block = MultiHeadBlock(d_model, n_heads, dropout)
        cross_self_attention_block = MultiHeadBlock(d_model, n_heads, dropout)
        feed_f_block = FeedForwardNet(d_model, dff, dropout)
        decoder_block = DecoderBlock(decoder_self_attention_block, cross_self_attention_block, feed_f_block, dropout, d_model)
        decoder_blocks.append(decoder_block)

    # encoder decoder
    encoder = Encoder(nn.ModuleList(encoder_blocks),d_model)
    decoder = Decoder(nn.ModuleList(decoder_blocks), d_model)

    # project layer
    projection_layer = ProjectionLayer(d_model, trgt_vocab_size)

    transformer = Transformer(encoder, decoder, src_embed, trgt_embed, projection_layer)

    for p in transformer.parameters():
        if p.dim() > 1:
            nn.init.xavier_uniform_(p)

    return transformer





if __name__ == "__main__":
    # Test
    dim = 64
    rope = RotaryEmbedding(dim)

    q = torch.randn(2, 8, 100, dim)  # (batch, heads, seq, d_k)
    k = torch.randn(2, 8, 100, dim)

    q_rot, k_rot = rope(q, k, 100)

    print(q_rot.shape)  # Should be (2, 8, 100, 64)
    print(torch.allclose(q_rot.norm(dim=-1), q.norm(dim=-1), atol=1e-5))  # Should be True (rotation preserves norm)


The human brain is a prediction machine. It is continuously taking 
in your surroundings and analyzing the information it comes across. 
Whenever you experience something repeatedly—like a paramedic 
seeing the face of a heart attack patient or a military analyst seeing a 
missile on a radar screen—your brain begins noticing what is 
important, sorting through the details and highlighting the relevant 
cues, and cataloging that information for future use. 

With enough practice, you can pick up on the cues that predict 
certain outcomes without consciously thinking about it. Automatically, 
your brain encodes the lessons learned through experience. We can’t 
always explain what it is we are learning, but learning is happening all 
along the way, and your ability to notice the relevant cues in a given 
situation is the foundation for every habit you have. 

We underestimate how much our brains and bodies can do without 
thinking. You do not tell your hair to grow, your heart to pump, your 
lungs to breathe, or your stomach to digest. And yet your body handles 
all this and more on autopilot. You are much more than your conscious 
self. 

Consider hunger. How do you know when you’re hungry? You don’t 
necessarily have to see a cookie on the counter to realize that it is time 
to eat. Appetite and hunger are governed nonconsciously. Your body 
has a variety of feedback loops that gradually alert you when it is time 
to eat again and that track what is going on around you and within you. 
Cravings can arise thanks to hormones and chemicals circulating 



through your body. Suddenly, you’re hungry even though you’re not 
quite sure what tipped you off. 

This is one of the most surprising insights about our habits: you 
don’t need to be aware of the cue for a habit to begin. You can notice an 
opportunity and take action without dedicating conscious attention to 
it. This is what makes habits useful. 

It’s also what makes them dangerous. As habits form, your actions 
come under the direction of your automatic and nonconscious mind. 
You fall into old patterns before you realize what’s happening. Unless 
someone points it out, you may not notice that you cover your mouth 
with your hand whenever you laugh, that you apologize before asking a 
question, or that you have a habit of finishing other people’s sentences. 
And the more you repeat these patterns, the less likely you become to 
question what you’re doing and why you’re doing it. 

I once heard of a retail clerk who was instructed to cut up empty gift 
cards after customers had used up the balance on the card. One day, 
the clerk cashed out a few customers in a row who purchased with gift 
cards. When the next person walked up, the clerk swiped the 
customer’s actual credit card, picked up the scissors, and then cut it in 
half—entirely on autopilot—before looking up at the stunned customer 
and realizing what had just happened. 

Another woman I came across in my research was a former 
preschool teacher who had switched to a corporate job. Even though 
she was now working with adults, her old habits would kick in and she 
kept asking coworkers if they had washed their hands after going to the 
bathroom. I also found the story of a man who had spent years 
working as a lifeguard and would occasionally yell “Walk!” whenever 
he saw a child running. 

Over time, the cues that spark our habits become so common that 
they are essentially invisible: the treats on the kitchen counter, the 
remote control next to the couch, the phone in our pocket. Our 
responses to these cues are so deeply encoded that it may feel like the 
urge to act comes from nowhere. For this reason, we must begin the 
process of behavior change with awareness. 

Before we can effectively build new habits, we need to get a handle 
on our current ones. This can be more challenging than it sounds 
because once a habit is firmly rooted in your life, it is mostly 



nonconscious and automatic. If a habit remains mindless, you can’t 
expect to improve it. As the psychologist Carl Jung said, “Until you 
make the unconscious conscious, it will direct your life and you will 
call it fate.” 


THE HABITS SCORECARD 

The Japanese railway system is regarded as one of the best in the 
world. If you ever find yourself riding a train in Tokyo, you’ll notice 
that the conductors have a peculiar habit. 

As each operator runs the train, they proceed through a ritual of 
pointing at different objects and calling out commands. When the train 
approaches a signal, the operator will point at it and say, “Signal is 
green.” As the train pulls into and out of each station, the operator will 
point at the speedometer and call out the exact speed. When it’s time 
to leave, the operator will point at the timetable and state the time. Out 
on the platform, other employees are performing similar actions. 
Before each train departs, staff members will point along the edge of 
the platform and declare, “All clear!” Every detail is identified, pointed 
at, and named aloud.* 

This process, known as Pointing-and-Calling, is a safety system 
designed to reduce mistakes. It seems silly, but it works incredibly 
well. Pointing-and-Calling reduces errors by up to 85 percent and cuts 
accidents by 30 percent. The MTA subway system in New York City 
adopted a modified version that is “point-only,” and “within two years 
of implementation, incidents of incorrectly berthed subways fell 57 
percent.” 

Pointing-and-Calling is so effective because it raises the level of 
awareness from a nonconscious habit to a more conscious level. 
Because the train operators must use their eyes, hands, mouth, and 
ears, they are more likely to notice problems before something goes 
wrong. 

My wife does something similar. Whenever we are preparing to 
walk out the door for a trip, she verbally calls out the most essential 
items in her packing list. “I’ve got my keys. I’ve got my wallet. I’ve got 
my glasses. I’ve got my husband.” 


The more automatic a behavior becomes, the less likely we are to 
consciously think about it. And when we’ve done something a 
thousand times before, we begin to overlook things. We assume that 
the next time will be just like the last. We’re so used to doing what 
we’ve always done that we don’t stop to question whether it’s the right 
thing to do at all. Many of our failures in performance are largely 
attributable to a lack of self-awareness. 

One of our greatest challenges in changing habits is maintaining 
awareness of what we are actually doing. This helps explain why the 
consequences of bad habits can sneak up on us. We need a “point-and- 
call” system for our personal lives. That’s the origin of the Habits 
Scorecard, which is a simple exercise you can use to become more 
aware of your behavior. To create your own, make a list of your daily 
habits. 

Here’s a sample of where your list might start: 

■ Wake up 

■ Turn off alarm 

■ Check my phone 

■ Go to the bathroom 

■ Weigh myself 

■ Take a shower 

■ Brush my teeth 

■ Floss my teeth 

■ Put on deodorant 

■ Hang up towel to dry 

■ Get dressed 

■ Make a cup of tea 

... and so on. 

Once you have a full list, look at each behavior, and ask yourself, “Is 
this a good habit, a bad habit, or a neutral habit?” If it is a good habit, 
write “+” next to it. If it is a bad habit, write If it is a neutral habit, 
write “=”. 




For example, the list above might look like this: 


■ Wake up = 

■ Turn off alarm = 

■ Check my phone - 

■ Go to the bathroom = 

■ Weigh myself + 

■ Take a shower + 

■ Brush my teeth + 

■ Floss my teeth + 

■ Put on deodorant + 

■ Hang up towel to dry = 

■ Get dressed = 

■ Make a cup of tea + 

The marks you give to a particular habit will depend on your 
situation and your goals. For someone who is trying to lose weight, 
eating a bagel with peanut butter every morning might be a bad habit. 
For someone who is trying to bulk up and add muscle, the same 
behavior might be a good habit. It all depends on what you’re working 
toward.* 

Scoring your habits can be a bit more complex for another reason as 
well. The labels “good habit” and “bad habit” are slightly inaccurate. 
There are no good habits or bad habits. There are only effective habits. 
That is, effective at solving problems. All habits serve you in some way 
—even the bad ones—which is why you repeat them. For this exercise, 
categorize your habits by how they will benefit you in the long run. 
Generally speaking, good habits will have net positive outcomes. Bad 
habits have net negative outcomes. Smoking a cigarette may reduce 
stress right now (that’s how it’s serving you), but it’s not a healthy 
long-term behavior. 

If you’re still having trouble determining how to rate a particular 
habit, here is a question I like to use: “Does this behavior help me 
become the type of person I wish to be? Does this habit cast a vote for 



or against my desired identity?” Habits that reinforce your desired 
identity are usually good. Habits that conflict with your desired 
identity are usually bad. 

As you create your Habits Scorecard, there is no need to change 
anything at first. The goal is to simply notice what is actually going on. 
Observe your thoughts and actions without judgment or internal 
criticism. Don’t blame yourself for your faults. Don’t praise yourself for 
your successes. 

If you eat a chocolate bar every morning, acknowledge it, almost as 
if you were watching someone else. Oh, how interesting that they 
would do sueh a thing. If you binge-eat, simply notice that you are 
eating more calories than you should. If you waste time online, notice 
that you are spending your life in a way that you do not want to. 

The first step to changing bad habits is to be on the lookout for 
them. If you feel like you need extra help, then you can try Pointing- 
and-Calling in your own life. Say out loud the action that you are 
thinking of taking and what the outcome will be. If you want to cut 
back on your junk food habit but notice yourself grabbing another 
cookie, say out loud, “I’m about to eat this cookie, but I don’t need it. 
Eating it will cause me to gain weight and hurt my health.” 

Hearing your bad habits spoken aloud makes the consequences 
seem more real. It adds weight to the action rather than letting 
yourself mindlessly slip into an old routine. This approach is useful 
even if you’re simply trying to remember a task on your to-do list. Just 
saying out loud, “Tomorrow, I need to go to the post office after lunch,” 
increases the odds that you’ll actually do it. You’re getting yourself to 
acknowledge the need for action—and that can make all the difference. 

The process of behavior change always starts with awareness. 
Strategies like Pointing-and-Calling and the Habits Scorecard are 
focused on getting you to recognize your habits and acknowledge the 
cues that trigger them, which makes it possible to respond in a way 
that benefits you. 

Chapter Summary 

■ With enough practice, your brain will pick up on the cues that 
predict certain outcomes without consciously thinking about it. 



Once our habits become automatic, we stop paying attention to 
what we are doing. 

The process of behavior change always starts with awareness. You 
need to be aware of your habits before you can change them, 

Pointing-and-Calling raises your level of awareness from a 
nonconscious habit to a more conscious level by verbalizing your 
actions. 

The Habits Scorecard is a simple exercise you can use to become 
more aware of your behavior. 



5 


The Best Way to Start a New Habit 

I N 2001, RESEARCHERS in Great Britain began working with 248 people 
to build better exercise habits over the course of two weeks. The 
subjects were divided into three groups. 

The first group was the control group. They were simply asked to 
track how often they exercised. 

The second group was the “motivation” group. They were asked not 
only to track their workouts but also to read some material on the 
benefits of exercise. The researchers also explained to the group how 
exercise could reduce the risk of coronary heart disease and improve 
heart health. 

Finally, there was the third group. These subjects received the same 
presentation as the second group, which ensured that they had equal 
levels of motivation. However, they were also asked to formulate a plan 
for when and where they would exercise over the following week. 
Specifically, each member of the third group completed the following 
sentence: “During the next week, I will partake in at least 20 minutes 
of vigorous exercise on [DAY] at [TIME] in [PLACE].” 

In the first and second groups, 35 to 38 percent of people exercised 
at least once per week. (Interestingly, the motivational presentation 
given to the second group seemed to have no meaningful impact on 
behavior.) But 91 percent of the third group exercised at least once per 
week—more than double the normal rate. 

The sentence they filled out is what researchers refer to as an 
implementation intention, which is a plan you make beforehand about 


when and where to act. That is, how you intend to implement a 
particular habit. 

The cues that can trigger a habit come in a wide range of forms—the 
feel of your phone buzzing in your pocket, the smell of chocolate chip 
cookies, the sound of ambulance sirens—but the two most common 
cues are time and location. Implementation intentions leverage both of 
these cues. 

Broadly speaking, the format for creating an implementation 

intention is: 

“When situation X arises, I will perform response Y.” 

Hundreds of studies have shown that implementation intentions are 
effective for sticking to our goals, whether it’s writing down the exact 
time and date of when you will get a flu shot or recording the time of 
your colonoscopy appointment. They increase the odds that people will 
stick with habits like recycling, studying, going to sleep early, and 
stopping smoking. 

Researchers have even found that voter turnout increases when 
people are forced to create implementation intentions by answering 
questions like: “What route are you taking to the polling station? At 
what time are you planning to go? What bus will get you there?” Other 
successful government programs have prompted citizens to make a 
clear plan to send taxes in on time or provided directions on when and 
where to pay late traffic bills. 

The punch line is clear: people who make a specific plan for when 
and where they will perform a new habit are more likely to follow 
through. Too many people try to change their habits without these 
basic details figured out. We tell ourselves, “I’m going to eat healthier” 
or “I’m going to write more,” but we never say when and where these 
habits are going to happen. We leave it up to chance and hope that we 
will “just remember to do it” or feel motivated at the right time. An 
implementation intention sweeps away foggy notions like “I want to 
work out more” or “I want to be more productive” or “I should vote” 
and transforms them into a concrete plan of action. 

Many people think they lack motivation when what they really lack 
is clarity. It is not always obvious when and where to take action. Some 
people spend their entire lives waiting for the time to be right to make 
an improvement. 



Once an implementation intention has been set, you don’t have to 
wait for inspiration to strike. Do I write a chapter today or not? Do I 
meditate this morning or at lunch? When the moment of action 
occurs, there is no need to make a decision. Simply follow your 
predetermined plan. 

The simple way to apply this strategy to your habits is to fill 

out this sentence: 

I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION]. 

■ Meditation. I will meditate for one minute at 7 a.m. in my kitchen. 

■ Studying. I will study Spanish for twenty minutes at 6 p.m. in my 
bedroom. 

■ Exercise. I will exercise for one hour at 5 p.m. in my local gym. 

■ Marriage. I will make my partner a cup of tea at 8 a.m. in the 
kitchen. 

If you aren’t sure when to start your habit, try the first day of the 
week, month, or year. People are more likely to take action at those 
times because hope is usually higher. If we have hope, we have a 
reason to take action. A fresh start feels motivating. 

There is another benefit to implementation intentions. Being 
specific about what you want and how you will achieve it helps you say 
no to things that derail progress, distract your attention, and pull you 
off course. We often say yes to little requests because we are not clear 
enough about what we need to be doing instead. When your dreams 
are vague, it’s easy to rationalize little exceptions all day long and never 
get around to the specific things you need to do to succeed. 

Give your habits a time and a space to live in the world. The goal is 
to make the time and location so obvious that, with enough repetition, 
you get an urge to do the right thing at the right time, even if you can’t 
say why. As the writer Jason Zweig noted, “Obviously you’re never 
going to just work out without conscious thought. But like a dog 
salivating at a bell, maybe you start to get antsy around the time of day 
you normally work out.” 

There are many ways to use implementation intentions in your life 
and work. My favorite approach is one I learned from Stanford 
professor BJ Eogg and it is a strategy I refer to as habit stacking. 



HABIT STACKING: A SIMPLE PLAN TO OVERHAUL YOUR 

HABITS 


The French philosopher Denis Diderot lived nearly his entire life in 
poverty, but that all changed one day in 1765. 

Diderot’s daughter was about to be married and he could not afford 
to pay for the wedding. Despite his lack of wealth, Diderot was well 
known for his role as the co-founder and writer of Encyclopedie, one of 
the most comprehensive encyclopedias of the time. When Catherine 
the Great, the Empress of Russia, heard of Diderot’s financial troubles, 
her heart went out to him. She was a book lover and greatly enjoyed his 
encyclopedia. She offered to buy Diderot’s personal library for £1,000 
—more than $150,000 today.* Suddenly, Diderot had money to spare. 
With his new wealth, he not only paid for the wedding but also 
acquired a scarlet robe for himself. 

Diderot’s scarlet robe was beautiful. So beautiful, in fact, that he 
immediately noticed how out of place it seemed when surrounded by 
his more common possessions. He wrote that there was “no more 
coordination, no more unity, no more beauty” between his elegant robe 
and the rest of his stuff. 

Diderot soon felt the urge to upgrade his possessions. He replaced 
his rug with one from Damascus. He decorated his home with 
expensive sculptures. He bought a mirror to place above the mantel, 
and a better kitchen table. He tossed aside his old straw chair for a 
leather one. Like falling dominoes, one purchase led to the next. 

Diderot’s behavior is not uncommon. In fact, the tendency for one 
purchase to lead to another one has a name: the Diderot Effect. The 
Diderot Effect states that obtaining a new possession often creates a 
spiral of consumption that leads to additional purchases. 

You can spot this pattern everywhere. You buy a dress and have to 
get new shoes and earrings to match. You buy a couch and suddenly 
question the layout of your entire living room. You buy a toy for your 
child and soon find yourself purchasing all of the accessories that go 
with it. It’s a chain reaction of purchases. 

Many human behaviors follow this cycle. You often decide what to 
do next based on what you have just finished doing. Going to the 
bathroom leads to washing and drying your hands, which reminds you 
that you need to put the dirty towels in the laundry, so you add laundry 


detergent to the shopping list, and so on. No behavior happens in 
isolation. Each action becomes a cue that triggers the next behavior. 

Why is this important? 

When it comes to building new habits, you can use the 
connectedness of behavior to your advantage. One of the best ways to 
build a new habit is to identify a current habit you already do each day 
and then stack your new behavior on top. This is called habit stacking. 

Habit stacking is a special form of an implementation intention. 
Rather than pairing your new habit with a particular time and location, 
you pair it with a current habit. This method, which was created by BJ 
Fogg as part of his Tiny Habits program, can be used to design an 
obvious cue for nearly any habit,* 

The habit stacking formula is: 

“After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT],” 

For example: 

■ Meditation, After I pour my cup of coffee each morning, I will 
meditate for one minute, 

■ Exercise, After I take off my work shoes, I will immediately 
change into my workout clothes, 

■ Gratitude, After I sit down to dinner, I will say one thing I’m 
grateful for that happened today, 

■ Marriage, After I get into bed at night, I will give my partner a 
kiss, 

■ Safety, After I put on my running shoes, I will text a friend or 
family member where I am running and how long it will take. 

The key is to tie your desired behavior into something you already 
do each day. Once you have mastered this basic structure, you can 
begin to create larger stacks by chaining small habits together. This 
allows you to take advantage of the natural momentum that comes 
from one behavior leading into the next—a positive version of the 
Diderot Effect, 


HABIT STACKING 


CUE CRAVING RESPONSE REWARD 


HABIT 1 


HABIT 2 


HABIT 3 


HABIT 4 


I 

P-- - - _ --- j 

I 

-^^-1 

I 

I 

i.. ■ ...' 

I-^^-1 

I 

( 

__ i 

r “ ~ “ 

i _^^^ 

I 

___ J 

I- 

4 ^ 


FIGURE 7 : Habit stacking increases the likelihood that you’ll stick with a 
habit by stacking your new behavior on top of an old one. This process can 
be repeated to chain numerous habits together, each one acting as the cue 
for the next. 


Your morning routine habit stack might look like this: 

1, After I pour my morning cup of coffee, I will meditate for sixty 
seconds. 

2, After I meditate for sixty seconds, I will write my to-do list for 
the day. 

3, After I write my to-do list for the day, I will immediately begin 
my first task. 

Or, consider this habit stack in the evening: 











1, After I finish eating dinner, I will put my plate directly into the 
dishwasher, 

2, After I put my dishes away, I will immediately wipe down the 
counter. 

3, After I wipe down the counter, I will set out my coffee mug for 
tomorrow morning. 

You can also insert new behaviors into the middle of your current 
routines. For example, you may already have a morning routine that 
looks like this: Wake up > Make my bed > Take a shower. Let’s say you 
want to develop the habit of reading more each night. You can expand 
your habit stack and try something like: Wake up > Make my bed > 
Place a book on my pillow > Take a shower. Now, when you climb into 
bed each night, a book will be sitting there waiting for you to enjoy. 

Overall, habit stacking allows you to create a set of simple rules that 
guide your future behavior. It’s like you always have a game plan for 
which action should come next. Once you get comfortable with this 
approach, you can develop general habit stacks to guide you whenever 
the situation is appropriate: 

■ Exercise. When I see a set of stairs, I will take them instead of 
using the elevator. 

■ Social skills. When I walk into a party, I will introduce myself to 
someone I don’t know yet, 

■ Finances, When I want to buy something over $100 ,1 will wait 
twenty-four hours before purchasing. 

■ Healthy eating. When I serve myself a meal, I will always put 
veggies on my plate first. 

■ Minimalism, When I buy a new item, I will give something away, 
(“One in, one out.”) 

■ Mood. When the phone rings, I will take one deep breath and 
smile before answering, 

■ Forgetfulness. When I leave a public place, I will check the table 
and chairs to make sure I don’t leave anything behind. 



No matter how you use this strategy, the secret to creating a 
successful habit stack is selecting the right cue to kick things off. 

Unlike an implementation intention, which specifically states the time 
and location for a given behavior, habit stacking implicitly has the time 
and location built into it. When and where you choose to insert a habit 
into your daily routine can make a big difference. If you’re trying to 
add meditation into your morning routine but mornings are chaotic 
and your kids keep running into the room, then that may be the wrong 
place and time. Consider when you are most likely to be successful. 
Don’t ask yourself to do a habit when you’re likely to be occupied with 
something else. 

Your cue should also have the same frequency as your desired habit. 
If you want to do a habit every day, but you stack it on top of a habit 
that only happens on Mondays, that’s not a good choice. 

One way to find the right trigger for your habit stack is by 
brainstorming a list of your current habits. You can use your Habits 
Scorecard from the last chapter as a starting point. Alternatively, you 
can create a list with two columns. In the first column, write down the 
habits you do each day without fail.* 

For example: 

■ Get out of bed. 

■ Take a shower. 

■ Brush your teeth. 

■ Get dressed. 

■ Brew a cup of coffee. 

■ Eat breakfast. 

■ Take the kids to school. 

■ Start the work day. 

■ Eat lunch. 

■ End the work day. 

■ Change out of work clothes. 

■ Sit down for dinner. 



■ Turn off the lights, 

■ Get into bed. 

Your list can be much longer, but you get the idea. In the second 
column, write down all of the things that happen to you each day 
without fail. For example: 

■ The sun rises, 

■ You get a text message. 

■ The song you are listening to ends. 

■ The sun sets. 

Armed with these two lists, you can begin searching for the best 
place to layer your new habit into your lifestyle. 

Habit stacking works best when the cue is highly specific and 
immediately actionable. Many people select cues that are too vague. I 
made this mistake myself. When I wanted to start a push-up habit, my 
habit stack was “When I take a break for lunch, I will do ten push-ups.” 
At first glance, this sounded reasonable. But soon, I realized the trigger 
was unclear. Would I do my push-ups before I ate lunch? After I ate 
lunch? Where would I do them? After a few inconsistent days, I 
changed my habit stack to: “When I close my laptop for lunch, I will do 
ten push-ups next to my desk.” Ambiguity gone. 

Habits like “read more” or “eat better” are worthy causes, but these 
goals do not provide instruction on how and when to act. Be specific 
and clear: After I close the door. After I brush my teeth. After I sit 
down at the table. The specificity is important. The more tightly bound 
your new habit is to a specific cue, the better the odds are that you will 
notice when the time comes to act. 

The 1st Law of Behavior Change is to make it obvious. Strategies 
like implementation intentions and habit stacking are among the most 
practical ways to create obvious cues for your habits and design a clear 
plan for when and where to take action. 

Chapter Summary 

■ The 1st Law of Behavior Change is make it obvious. 



The two most common cues are time and location. 

Creating an implementation intention is a strategy you can use to 
pair a new habit with a specific time and location. 

The implementation intention formula is: I will [BEHAVIOR] at 
[TIME] in [LOCATION], 

Habit stacking is a strategy you can use to pair a new habit with a 
current habit. 


The habit stacking formula is: After [CURRENT HABIT], I will 
[NEW HABIT], 



6 


Motivation is Overrated; Environment 
Often Matters More 

Anne Thorndike, a primary care physician at Massachusetts General 
Hospital in Boston, had a crazy idea. She believed she could improve 
the eating habits of thousands of hospital staff and visitors without 
changing their willpower or motivation in the slightest way. In fact, she 
didn’t plan on talking to them at all. 

Thorndike and her colleagues designed a six-month study to alter 
the “choice architecture” of the hospital cafeteria. They started by 
changing how drinks were arranged in the room. Originally, the 
refrigerators located next to the cash registers in the cafeteria were 
filled with only soda. The researchers added water as an option to each 
one. Additionally, they placed baskets of bottled water next to the food 
stations throughout the room. Soda was still in the primary 
refrigerators, but water was now available at all drink locations. 

Over the next three months, the number of soda sales at the hospital 
dropped by 11.4 percent. Meanwhile, sales of bottled water increased 
by 25.8 percent. They made similar adjustments—and saw similar 
results—with the food in the cafeteria. Nobody had said a word to 
anyone eating there. 


BEFORE 


AFTER 




FIGURE 8: Here is a representation of what the cafeteria looked like before 
the environment design changes were made (left) and after (right). The 
shaded boxes indicate areas where bottled water was available in each 
instance. Because the amount of water in the environment was increased, 
behavior shifted naturally and without additional motivation. 


People often choose products not because of what they are, but 
because of where they are. If I walk into the kitchen and see a plate of 
cookies on the counter, I’ll pick up half a dozen and start eating, even if 
I hadn’t been thinking about them beforehand and didn’t necessarily 
feel hungry. If the communal table at the office is always filled with 
doughnuts and bagels, it’s going to be hard not to grab one every now 
and then. Your habits change depending on the room you are in and 
the cues in front of you. 

Environment is the invisible hand that shapes human behavior. 
Despite our unique personalities, certain behaviors tend to arise again 
and again under certain environmental conditions. In church, people 
tend to talk in whispers. On a dark street, people act wary and guarded. 
In this way, the most common form of change is not internal, but 
external: we are changed by the world around us. Every habit is 
context dependent. 

In 1936, psychologist Kurt Lewin wrote a simple equation that 
makes a powerful statement: Behavior is a function of the Person in 
their Environment, or B =/(P,E), 













































It didn’t take long for Lewin’s Equation to be tested in business. In 
1952, the economist Hawkins Stern described a phenomenon he called 
Suggestion Impulse Buying, which “is triggered when a shopper sees a 
product for the first time and visualizes a need for it,” In other words, 
customers will occasionally buy products not because they want them 
but because of how they are presented to them. 

For example, items at eye level tend to be purchased more than 
those down near the floor. For this reason, you’ll find expensive brand 
names featured in easy-to-reach locations on store shelves because 
they drive the most profit, while cheaper alternatives are tucked away 
in harder-to-reach spots. The same goes for end caps, which are the 
units at the end of aisles. End caps are moneymaking machines for 
retailers because they are obvious locations that encounter a lot of foot 
traffic. For example, 45 percent of Coca-Cola sales come specifically 
from end-of-the-aisle racks. 

The more obviously available a product or service is, the more likely 
you are to try it. People drink Bud Light because it is in every bar and 
visit Starbucks because it is on every corner. We like to think that we 
are in control. If we choose water over soda, we assume it is because 
we wanted to do so. The truth, however, is that many of the actions we 
take each day are shaped not by purposeful drive and choice but by the 
most obvious option. 

Every living being has its own methods for sensing and 
understanding the world. Eagles have remarkable long-distance vision. 
Snakes can smell by “tasting the air” with their highly sensitive 
tongues. Sharks can detect small amounts of electricity and vibrations 
in the water caused by nearby fish. Even bacteria have chemoreceptors 
—tiny sensory cells that allow them to detect toxic chemicals in their 
environment. 

In humans, perception is directed by the sensory nervous system. 
We perceive the world through sight, sound, smell, touch, and taste. 
But we also have other ways of sensing stimuli. Some are conscious, 
but many are nonconscious. For instance, you can “notice” when the 
temperature drops before a storm, or when the pain in your gut rises 
during a stomachache, or when you fall off balance while walking on 
rocky ground. Receptors in your body pick up on a wide range of 
internal stimuli, such as the amount of salt in your blood or the need to 
drink when thirsty. 



The most powerful of all human sensory abilities, however, is vision. 
The human body has about eleven million sensory receptors. 
Approximately ten million of those are dedicated to sight. Some 
experts estimate that half of the brain’s resources are used on vision. 
Given that we are more dependent on vision than on any other sense, it 
should come as no surprise that visual cues are the greatest catalyst of 
our behavior. For this reason, a small change in what you see can lead 
to a big shift in what you do. Asa result, you can imagine how 
important it is to live and work in environments that are filled with 
productive cues and devoid of unproductive ones. 

Thankfully, there is good news in this respect. You don’t have to be 
the victim of your environment. You can also be the architect of it. 


HOW TO DESIGN YOUR ENVIRONMENT FOR SUCCESS 

During the energy crisis and oil embargo of the 1970s, Dutch 
researchers began to pay close attention to the country’s energy usage. 
In one suburb near Amsterdam, they found that some homeowners 
used 30 percent less energy than their neighbors—despite the homes 
being of similar size and getting electricity for the same price. 

It turned out the houses in this neighborhood were nearly identical 
except for one feature: the location of the electrical meter. Some had 
one in the basement. Others had the electrical meter upstairs in the 
main hallway. As you may guess, the homes with the meters located in 
the main hallway used less electricity. When their energy use was 
obvious and easy to track, people changed their behavior. 

Every habit is initiated by a cue, and we are more likely to notice 
cues that stand out. Unfortunately, the environments where we live 
and work often make it easy not to do certain actions because there is 
no obvious cue to trigger the behavior. It’s easy not to practice the 
guitar when it’s tucked away in the closet. It’s easy not to read a book 
when the bookshelf is in the corner of the guest room. It’s easy not to 
take your vitamins when they are out of sight in the pantry. When the 
cues that spark a habit are subtle or hidden, they are easy to ignore. 

By comparison, creating obvious visual cues can draw your 
attention toward a desired habit. In the early 1990s, the cleaning staff 
at Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam installed a small sticker that looked 
like a fly near the center of each urinal. Apparently, when men stepped 



up to the urinals, they aimed for what they thought was a bug. The 
stickers improved their aim and significantly reduced “spillage” around 
the urinals. Further analysis determined that the stickers cut bathroom 
cleaning costs by 8 percent per year. 

I’ve experienced the power of obvious cues in my own life. I used to 
buy apples from the store, put them in the crisper in the bottom of the 
refrigerator, and forget all about them. By the time I remembered, the 
apples would have gone bad. I never saw them, so I never ate them. 

Eventually, I took my own advice and redesigned my environment. I 
bought a large display bowl and placed it in the middle of the kitchen 
counter. The next time I bought apples, that was where they went—out 
in the open where I could see them. Almost like magic, I began eating a 
few apples each day simply because they were obvious rather than out 
of sight. 

Here are a few ways you can redesign your environment and make 
the cues for your preferred habits more obvious: 

■ If you want to remember to take your medication each night, put 
your pill bottle directly next to the faucet on the bathroom 
counter. 

■ If you want to practice guitar more frequently, place your guitar 
stand in the middle of the living room. 

■ If you want to remember to send more thank-you notes, keep a 
stack of stationery on your desk. 

■ If you want to drink more water, fill up a few water bottles each 
morning and place them in common locations around the house. 

If you want to make a habit a big part of your life, make the cue a big 
part of your environment. The most persistent behaviors usually have 
multiple cues. Consider how many different ways a smoker could be 
prompted to pull out a cigarette: driving in the car, seeing a friend 
smoke, feeling stressed at work, and so on. 

The same strategy can be employed for good habits. By sprinkling 
triggers throughout your surroundings, you increase the odds that 
you’ll think about your habit throughout the day. Make sure the best 
choice is the most obvious one. Making a better decision is easy and 
natural when the cues for good habits are right in front of you. 



Environment design is powerful not only because it influences how 
we engage with the world but also because we rarely do it. Most people 
live in a world others have created for them. But you can alter the 
spaces where you live and work to increase your exposure to positive 
cues and reduce your exposure to negative ones. Environment design 
allows you to take back control and become the architect of your life. 
Be the designer of your world and not merely the consumer of it. 


THE CONTEXT IS THE CUE 

The cues that trigger a habit can start out very specific, but over time 
your habits become associated not with a single trigger but with the 
entire context surrounding the behavior, 

Eor example, many people drink more in social situations than they 
would ever drink alone. The trigger is rarely a single cue, but rather the 
whole situation: watching your friends order drinks, hearing the music 
at the bar, seeing the beers on tap. 

We mentally assign our habits to the locations in which they occur: 
the home, the office, the gym. Each location develops a connection to 
certain habits and routines. You establish a particular relationship with 
the objects on your desk, the items on your kitchen counter, the things 
in your bedroom. 

Our behavior is not defined by the objects in the environment but by 
our relationship to them. In fact, this is a useful way to think about the 
influence of the environment on your behavior. Stop thinking about 
your environment as filled with objects. Start thinking about it as filled 
with relationships. Think in terms of how you interact with the spaces 
around you. Eor one person, her couch is the place where she reads for 
an hour each night, Eor someone else, the couch is where he watches 
television and eats a bowl of ice cream after work. Different people can 
have different memories—and thus different habits—associated with 
the same place. 

The good news? You can train yourself to link a particular habit with 
a particular context. 

In one study, scientists instructed insomniacs to get into bed only 
when they were tired. If they couldn’t fall asleep, they were told to sit 
in a different room until they became sleepy. Over time, subjects began 



to associate the context of their bed with the action of sleeping, and it 
became easier to quickly fall asleep when they climbed in bed. Their 
brains learned that sleeping—not browsing on their phones, not 
watching television, not staring at the clock—was the only action that 
happened in that room. 

The power of context also reveals an important strategy: habits can 
be easier to change in a new environment. It helps to escape the subtle 
triggers and cues that nudge you toward your current habits. Go to a 
new place—a different coffee shop, a bench in the park, a corner of 
your room you seldom use—and create a new routine there. 

It is easier to associate a new habit with a new context than to build 
a new habit in the face of competing cues. It can be difficult to go to 
bed early if you watch television in your bedroom each night. It can be 
hard to study in the living room without getting distracted if that’s 
where you always play video games. But when you step outside your 
normal environment, you leave your behavioral biases behind. You 
aren’t battling old environmental cues, which allows new habits to 
form without interruption. 

Want to think more creatively? Move to a bigger room, a rooftop 
patio, or a building with expansive architecture. Take a break from the 
space where you do your daily work, which is also linked to your 
current thought patterns. 

Trying to eat healthier? It is likely that you shop on autopilot at your 
regular supermarket. Try a new grocery store. You may find it easier to 
avoid unhealthy food when your brain doesn’t automatically know 
where it is located in the store. 

When you can’t manage to get to an entirely new environment, 
redefine or rearrange your current one. Create a separate space for 
work, study, exercise, entertainment, and cooking. The mantra I find 
useful is “One space, one use.” 

When I started my career as an entrepreneur, I would often work 
from my couch or at the kitchen table. In the evenings, I found it very 
difficult to stop working. There was no clear division between the end 
of work time and the beginning of personal time. Was the kitchen table 
my office or the space where I ate meals? Was the couch where I 
relaxed or where I sent emails? Everything happened in the same 
place. 



A few years later, I could finally afford to move to a home with a 
separate room for my office. Suddenly, work was something that 
happened “in here” and personal life was something that happened 
“out there.” It was easier for me to turn off the professional side of my 
brain when there was a clear dividing line between work life and home 
life. Each room had one primary use. The kitchen was for cooking. The 
office was for working. 

Whenever possible, avoid mixing the context of one habit with 
another. When you start mixing contexts, you’ll start mixing habits— 
and the easier ones will usually win out. This is one reason why the 
versatility of modern technology is both a strength and a weakness. 
You can use your phone for all sorts of tasks, which makes it a 
powerful device. But when you can use your phone to do nearly 
anything, it becomes hard to associate it with one task. You want to be 
productive, but you’re also conditioned to browse social media, check 
email, and play video games whenever you open your phone. It’s a 
mishmash of cues. 

You may be thinking, “You don’t understand. I live in New York 
City. My apartment is the size of a smartphone. I need each room to 
play multiple roles.” Fair enough. If your space is limited, divide your 
room into activity zones: a chair for reading, a desk for writing, a table 
for eating. You can do the same with your digital spaces. I know a 
writer who uses his computer only for writing, his tablet only for 
reading, and his phone only for social media and texting. Every habit 
should have a home. 

If you can manage to stick with this strategy, each context will 
become associated with a particular habit and mode of thought. Habits 
thrive under predictable circumstances like these. Focus comes 
automatically when you are sitting at your work desk. Relaxation is 
easier when you are in a space designed for that purpose. Sleep comes 
quickly when it is the only thing that happens in your bedroom. If you 
want behaviors that are stable and predictable, you need an 
environment that is stable and predictable. 

A stable environment where everything has a place and a purpose is 
an environment where habits can easily form. 


Chapter Summary 



Small changes in context can lead to large changes in behavior 
over time. 

Every habit is initiated by a cue. We are more likely to notice cues 
that stand out. 

Make the cues of good habits obvious in your environment. 

Gradually, your habits become associated not with a single trigger 
but with the entire context surrounding the behavior. The context 
becomes the cue. 

It is easier to build new habits in a new environment because you 
are not fighting against old cues. 



7 


The Secret to Self-Control 

I N 1971, as the Vietnam War was heading into its sixteenth year, 
congressmen Robert Steele from Connecticut and Morgan Murphy 
from Illinois made a discovery that stunned the American public. 
While visiting the troops, they had learned that over 15 percent of U.S. 
soldiers stationed there were heroin addicts. Follow-up research 
revealed that 35 percent of service members in Vietnam had tried 
heroin and as many as 20 percent were addicted—the problem was 
even worse than they had initially thought. 

The discovery led to a flurry of activity in Washington, including the 
creation of the Special Action Office of Drug Abuse Prevention under 
President Nixon to promote prevention and rehabilitation and to track 
addicted service members when they returned home, 

Lee Robins was one of the researchers in charge. In a finding that 
completely upended the accepted beliefs about addiction, Robins 
found that when soldiers who had been heroin users returned home, 
only 5 percent of them became re-addicted within a year, and just 12 
percent relapsed within three years. In other words, approximately 
nine out of ten soldiers who used heroin in Vietnam eliminated their 
addiction nearly overnight. 

This finding contradicted the prevailing view at the time, which 
considered heroin addiction to be a permanent and irreversible 
condition. Instead, Robins revealed that addictions could 
spontaneously dissolve if there was a radical change in the 
environment. In Vietnam, soldiers spent all day surrounded by cues 
triggering heroin use: it was easy to access, they were engulfed by the 
constant stress of war, they built friendships with fellow soldiers who 


were also heroin users, and they were thousands of miles from home. 
Once a soldier returned to the United States, though, he found himself 
in an environment devoid of those triggers. When the context changed, 
so did the habit. 

Compare this situation to that of a typical drug user. Someone 
becomes addicted at home or with friends, goes to a clinic to get clean 
—which is devoid of all the environmental stimuli that prompt their 
habit—then returns to their old neighborhood with all of their previous 
cues that caused them to get addicted in the first place. It’s no wonder 
that usually you see numbers that are the exact opposite of those in the 
Vietnam study. Typically, 90 percent of heroin users become re¬ 
addicted once they return home from rehab. 

The Vietnam studies ran counter to many of our cultural beliefs 
about bad habits because it challenged the conventional association of 
unhealthy behavior as a moral weakness. If you’re overweight, a 
smoker, or an addict, you’ve been told your entire life that it is because 
you lack self-control—maybe even that you’re a bad person. The idea 
that a little bit of discipline would solve all our problems is deeply 
embedded in our culture. 

Recent research, however, shows something different. When 
scientists analyze people who appear to have tremendous self-control, 
it turns out those individuals aren’t all that different from those who 
are struggling. Instead, “disciplined” people are better at structuring 
their lives in a way that does not require heroic willpower and self- 
control, In other words, they spend less time in tempting situations. 

The people with the best self-control are typically the ones who need 
to use it the least. It’s easier to practice self-restraint when you don’t 
have to use it very often. So, yes, perseverance, grit, and willpower are 
essential to success, but the way to improve these qualities is not by 
wishing you were a more disciplined person, but by creating a more 
disciplined environment. 

This counterintuitive idea makes even more sense once you 
understand what happens when a habit is formed in the brain, A habit 
that has been encoded in the mind is ready to be used whenever the 
relevant situation arises. When Patty 01 well, a therapist from Austin, 
Texas, started smoking, she would often light up while riding horses 
with a friend. Eventually, she quit smoking and avoided it for years. 

She had also stopped riding. Decades later, she hopped on a horse 



again and found herself craving a cigarette for the first time in forever. 
The cues were still internalized; she just hadn’t been exposed to them 
in a long time. 

Once a habit has been encoded, the urge to act follows whenever the 
environmental cues reappear. This is one reason behavior change 
techniques can backfire. Shaming obese people with weight-loss 
presentations can make them feel stressed, and as a result many 
people return to their favorite coping strategy: overeating. Showing 
pictures of blackened lungs to smokers leads to higher levels of 
anxiety, which drives many people to reach for a cigarette. If you’re not 
careful about cues, you can cause the very behavior you want to stop. 

Bad habits are autocatalytic: the process feeds itself. They foster the 
feelings they try to numb. You feel bad, so you eat junk food. Because 
you eat junk food, you feel bad. Watching television makes you feel 
sluggish, so you watch more television because you don’t have the 
energy to do anything else. Worrying about your health makes you feel 
anxious, which causes you to smoke to ease your anxiety, which makes 
your health even worse and soon you’re feeling more anxious. It’s a 
downward spiral, a runaway train of bad habits. 

Researchers refer to this phenomenon as “cue-induced wanting”: an 
external trigger causes a compulsive craving to repeat a bad habit. 

Once you notice something, you begin to want it. This process is 
happening all the time—often without us realizing it. Scientists have 
found that showing addicts a picture of cocaine for just thirty-three 
milliseconds stimulates the reward pathway in the brain and sparks 
desire. This speed is too fast for the brain to consciously register—the 
addicts couldn’t even tell you what they had seen—but they craved the 
drug all the same. 

Here’s the punch line: You can break a habit, but you’re unlikely to 
forget it. Once the mental grooves of habit have been carved into your 
brain, they are nearly impossible to remove entirely—even if they go 
unused for quite a while. And that means that simply resisting 
temptation is an ineffective strategy. It is hard to maintain a Zen 
attitude in a life filled with interruptions. It takes too much energy. In 
the short-run, you can choose to overpower temptation. In the long- 
run, we become a product of the environment that we live in. To put it 
bluntly, I have never seen someone consistently stick to positive habits 
in a negative environment. 



A more reliable approach is to cut bad habits off at the source. One 
of the most practical ways to eliminate a bad habit is to reduce 
exposure to the cue that causes it. 

■ If you can’t seem to get any work done, leave your phone in 
another room for a few hours. 

■ If you’re continually feeling like you’re not enough, stop following 
social media accounts that trigger jealousy and envy. 

■ If you’re wasting too much time watching television, move the TV 
out of the bedroom. 

■ If you’re spending too much money on electronics, quit reading 
reviews of the latest tech gear. 

■ If you’re playing too many video games, unplug the console and 
put it in a closet after each use. 

This practice is an inversion of the ist Law of Behavior Change. 
Rather than make it obvious, you can make it invisible. I’m often 
surprised by how effective simple changes like these can be. Remove a 
single cue and the entire habit often fades away. 

Self-control is a short-term strategy, not a long-term one. You may 
be able to resist temptation once or twice, but it’s unlikely you can 
muster the willpower to override your desires every time. Instead of 
summoning a new dose of willpower whenever you want to do the right 
thing, your energy would be better spent optimizing your environment. 
This is the secret to self-control. Make the cues of your good habits 
obvious and the cues of your bad habits invisible. 

Chapter Summary 

■ The inversion of the ist Law of Behavior Change is make it 
invisible. 

■ Once a habit is formed, it is unlikely to be forgotten. 

■ People with high self-control tend to spend less time in tempting 
situations. It’s easier to avoid temptation than resist it. 

■ One of the most practical ways to eliminate a bad habit is to 
reduce exposure to the cue that causes it. 

■ Self-control is a short-term strategy, not a long-term one. 



HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT 


The 1st Law: Make It Obvious 


1.1: Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them. 
1.2: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].” 

1.3: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].” 

1.4: Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible. 


The 2nd Law: Make It Attractive 
The 3rd Law: Make It Easy 
The 4th Law: Make It Satisfying 


HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT 


Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible 


1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment. 


Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive 
Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult 
Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying 


I_I 

You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: 
atomichabits.com/cheatsheet 





















THE 2ND LAW 


Make It Attractive 


8 


How to Make a Habit Irresistible 

I N THE 1940S, a Dutch scientist named Niko Tinbergen performed a 
series of experiments that transformed our understanding of what 
motivates us, Tinbergen—who eventually won a Nobel Prize for his 
work—was investigating herring gulls, the gray and white birds often 
seen flying along the seashores of North America, 

Adult herring gulls have a small red dot on their beak, and 
Tinbergen noticed that newly hatched chicks would peck this spot 
whenever they wanted food. To begin one experiment, he created a 
collection of fake cardboard beaks, just a head without a body. When 
the parents had flown away, he went over to the nest and offered these 
dummy beaks to the chicks. The beaks were obvious fakes, and he 
assumed the baby birds would reject them altogether. 

However, when the tiny gulls saw the red spot on the cardboard 
beak, they pecked away just as if it were attached to their own mother. 
They had a clear preference for those red spots—as if they had been 
genetically programmed at birth. Soon Tinbergen discovered that the 
bigger the red spot, the faster the chicks pecked. Eventually, he created 
a beak with three large red dots on it. When he placed it over the nest, 
the baby birds went crazy with delight. They pecked at the little red 
patches as if it was the greatest beak they had ever seen, 

Tinbergen and his colleagues discovered similar behavior in other 
animals. For example, the greylag goose is a ground-nesting bird. 
Occasionally, as the mother moves around on the nest, one of the eggs 
will roll out and settle on the grass nearby. Whenever this happens, the 
goose will waddle over to the egg and use its beak and neck to pull it 
back into the nest. 


Tinbergen discovered that the goose will pull any nearby round 
object, such as a billiard ball or a lightbulb, back into the nest. The 
bigger the object, the greater their response. One goose even made a 
tremendous effort to roll a volleyball back and sit on top. Like the baby 
gulls automatically pecking at red dots, the greylag goose was following 
an instinctive rule: When I see a round objeet nearby, I must roll it 
baek into the nest. The bigger the round object, the harder I should try 
to get it. 

It’s like the brain of each animal is preloaded with certain rules for 
behavior, and when it comes across an exaggerated version of that rule, 
it lights up like a Christmas tree. Scientists refer to these exaggerated 
cues as supernormal stimuli. A supernormal stimulus is a heightened 
version of reality—like a beak with three red dots or an egg the size of a 
volleyball—and it elicits a stronger response than usual. 

Humans are also prone to fall for exaggerated versions of reality. 
Junk food, for example, drives our reward systems into a frenzy. After 
spending hundreds of thousands of years hunting and foraging for 
food in the wild, the human brain has evolved to place a high value on 
salt, sugar, and fat. Such foods are often calorie-dense and they were 
quite rare when our ancient ancestors were roaming the savannah. 
When you don’t know where your next meal is coming from, eating as 
much as possible is an excellent strategy for survival. 

Today, however, we live in a calorie-rich environment. Food is 
abundant, but your brain continues to crave it like it is scarce. Placing 
a high value on salt, sugar, and fat is no longer advantageous to our 
health, but the craving persists because the brain’s reward centers have 
not changed for approximately fifty thousand years. The modern food 
industry relies on stretching our Paleolithic instincts beyond their 
evolutionary purpose. 

A primary goal of food science is to create products that are more 
attractive to consumers. Nearly every food in a bag, box, or jar has 
been enhanced in some way, if only with additional flavoring. 
Companies spend millions of dollars to discover the most satisfying 
level of crunch in a potato chip or the perfect amount of fizz in a soda. 
Entire departments are dedicated to optimizing how a product feels in 
your mouth—a quality known as orosensation. French fries, for 
example, are a potent combination—golden brown and crunchy on the 
outside, light and smooth on the inside. 



Other processed foods enhance dynamic contrast, which refers to 
items with a combination of sensations, like crunchy and creamy. 
Imagine the gooeyness of melted cheese on top of a crispy pizza crust, 
or the crunch of an Oreo cookie combined with its smooth center. With 
natural, unprocessed foods, you tend to experience the same 
sensations over and over—how’s that seventeenth bite of kale taste? 
After a few minutes, your brain loses interest and you begin to feel full. 
But foods that are high in dynamic contrast keep the experience novel 
and interesting, encouraging you to eat more. 

Ultimately, such strategies enable food scientists to find the “bliss 
point” for each product—the precise combination of salt, sugar, and fat 
that excites your brain and keeps you coming back for more. The 
result, of course, is that you overeat because hyperpalatable foods are 
more attractive to the human brain. As Stephan Guyenet, a 
neuroscientist who specializes in eating behavior and obesity, says, 
“We’ve gotten too good at pushing our own buttons,” 

The modern food industry, and the overeating habits it has 
spawned, is just one example of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change: 

Make it attraetive. The more attractive an opportunity is, the more 
likely it is to become habit-forming. 

Look around. Society is filled with highly engineered versions of 
reality that are more attractive than the world our ancestors evolved in. 
Stores feature mannequins with exaggerated hips and breasts to sell 
clothes. Social media delivers more “likes” and praise in a few minutes 
than we could ever get in the office or at home. Online porn splices 
together stimulating scenes at a rate that would be impossible to 
replicate in real life. Advertisements are created with a combination of 
ideal lighting, professional makeup, and Photoshopped edits—even the 
model doesn’t look like the person in the final image. These are the 
supernormal stimuli of our modern world. They exaggerate features 
that are naturally attractive to us, and our instincts go wild as a result, 
driving us into excessive shopping habits, social media habits, porn 
habits, eating habits, and many others. 

If history serves as a guide, the opportunities of the future will be 
more attractive than those of today. The trend is for rewards to become 
more concentrated and stimuli to become more enticing. Junk food is a 
more concentrated form of calories than natural foods. Hard liquor is a 
more concentrated form of alcohol than beer. Video games are a more 



concentrated form of play than board games. Compared to nature, 
these pleasure-packed experiences are hard to resist. We have the 
brains of our ancestors but temptations they never had to face. 

If you want to increase the odds that a behavior will occur, then you 
need to make it attractive. Throughout our discussion of the 2nd Law, 
our goal is to learn how to make our habits irresistible. While it is not 
possible to transform every habit into a supernormal stimulus, we can 
make any habit more enticing. To do this, we must start by 
understanding what a craving is and how it works. 

We begin by examining a biological signature that all habits share— 
the dopamine spike. 


THE DOPAMINE-DRIVEN FEEDBACK LOOP 

Scientists can track the precise moment a craving occurs by measuring 
a neurotransmitter called dopamine.!! The importance of dopamine 
became apparent in 1954 when the neuroscientists James Olds and 
Peter Milner ran an experiment that revealed the neurological 
processes behind craving and desire. By implanting electrodes in the 
brains of rats, the researchers blocked the release of dopamine. To the 
surprise of the scientists, the rats lost all will to live. They wouldn’t eat. 
They wouldn’t have sex. They didn’t crave anything. Within a few days, 
the animals died of thirst. 

In follow-up studies, other scientists also inhibited the dopamine¬ 
releasing parts of the brain, but this time, they squirted little droplets 
of sugar into the mouths of the dopamine-depleted rats. Their little rat 
faces lit up with pleasurable grins from the tasty substance. Even 
though dopamine was blocked, they liked the sugar just as much as 
before; they just didn’t want it anymore. The ability to experience 
pleasure remained, but without dopamine, desire died. And without 
desire, action stopped. 

When other researchers reversed this process and flooded the 
reward system of the brain with dopamine, animals performed habits 
at breakneck speed. In one study, mice received a powerful hit of 
dopamine each time they poked their nose in a box. Within minutes, 
the mice developed a craving so strong they began poking their nose 
into the box eight hundred times per hour. (Humans are not so 


different: the average slot machine player will spin the wheel six 
hundred times per hour.) 

Habits are a dopamine-driven feedback loop. Every behavior that is 
highly habit-forming—taking drugs, eating junk food, playing video 
games, browsing social media—is associated with higher levels of 
dopamine. The same can be said for our most basic habitual behaviors 
like eating food, drinking water, having sex, and interacting socially. 

For years, scientists assumed dopamine was all about pleasure, but 
now we know it plays a central role in many neurological processes, 
including motivation, learning and memory, punishment and aversion, 
and voluntary movement. 

When it comes to habits, the key takeaway is this: dopamine is 
released not only when you experience pleasure, but also when you 
anticipate it. Gambling addicts have a dopamine spike right before 
they place a bet, not after they win. Cocaine addicts get a surge of 
dopamine when they see the powder, not after they take it. Whenever 
you predict that an opportunity will be rewarding, your levels of 
dopamine spike in anticipation. And whenever dopamine rises, so does 
your motivation to act. 

It is the anticipation of a reward—not the fulfillment of it—that gets 
us to take action. 

The 48 Laws of Power 


by Robert Greene and Joost Elffers 
Law 1 

Never Outshine the Master 

Always make those above you feel comfortably superior. In your desire to please or impress 
them, do not go too far in displaying your talents or you might accomplish the opposite - inspire 
fear and insecurity. Make your masters appear more brilliant than they are and you will attain 
the heights of power. 


Law 2 

Never put too Much Trust in Friends, Learn how to use Enemies 

Be wary of friends-they will betray you more quickly, for they are easily aroused to envy. They 
also become spoiled and tyrannical. But hire a former enemy and he will be more loyal than a 
friend, because he has more to prove. In fact, you have more to fear from friends than from 
enemies. If you have no enemies, find a way to make them. 

Law 3 

Conceal your Intentions 

Keep people off-balance and in the dark by never revealing the purpose behind your actions. If 
they have no clue what you are up to, they cannot prepare a defense. Guide them far enough 
down the wrong path, envelope them in enough smoke, and by the time they realize your 
intentions, it will be too late. 


Law 4 

Always Say Less than Necessary 

When you are trying to impress people with words, the more you say, the more common you 
appear, and the less in control. Even if you are saying something banal, it will seem original if 
you make it vague, open-ended, and sphinxlike. Powerful people impress and intimidate by 
saying less. The more you say, the more likely you are to say something foolish. 

Law 5 

So Much Depends on Reputation - Guard it with your Life 



Reputation is the cornerstone of power. Through reputation alone you can intimidate and win; 
once you slip, however, you are vulnerable, and will be attacked on all sides. Make your 
reputation unassailable. Always be alert to potential attacks and thwart them before they 
happen. Meanwhile, learn to destroy your enemies by opening holes in their own reputations. 
Then stand aside and let public opinion hang them. 

Law 6 

Court Attention at all Cost 

Everything is judged by its appearance; what is unseen counts for nothing. Never let yourself get 
lost in the crowd, then, or buried in oblivion. Stand out. Be conspicuous, at all cost. Make 
yourself a magnet of attention by appearing larger, more colorful, more mysterious, than the 
bland and timid masses. 


Law 7 

Get others to do the Work for you, but Always Take the Credit 

Use the wisdom, knowledge, and legwork of other people to further your own cause. Not only 
will such assistance save you valuable time and energy, it will give you a godlike aura of 
efficiency and speed. In the end your helpers will be forgotten and you will be remembered. 
Never do yourself what others can do for you. 

Law 8 

Make other People come to you - use Bait if Necessary 

When you force the other person to act, you are the one in control. It is always better to make 
your opponent come to you, abandoning his own plans in the process. Lure him with fabulous 
gains - then attack. You hold the cards. 


Law 9 

Win through your Actions, Never through Argument 

Any momentary triumph you think gained through argument is really a Pyrrhic victory: The 
resentment and ill will you stir up is stronger and lasts longer than any momentary change of 
opinion. It is much more powerful to get others to agree with you through your actions, without 
saying a word. Demonstrate, do not explicate. 

Law 10 


Infection: Avoid the Unhappy and Unlucky 



You can die from someone else’s misery - emotional states are as infectious as disease. You 
may feel you are helping the drowning man but you are only precipitating your own disaster. 
The unfortunate sometimes draw misfortune on themselves; they will also draw it on you. 
Associate with the happy and fortunate instead. 

Law 11 

Learn to Keep People Dependent on You 

To maintain your independence you must always be needed and wanted. The more you are 
relied on, the more freedom you have. Make people depend on you for their happiness and 
prosperity and you have nothing to fear. Never teach them enough so that they can do without 
you. 


Law 12 

Use Selective Honesty and Generosity to Disarm your Victim 

One sincere and honest move will cover over dozens of dishonest ones. Open-hearted gestures 
of honesty and generosity bring down the guard of even the most suspicious people. Once your 
selective honesty opens a hole in their armor, you can deceive and manipulate them at will. A 
timely gift - a Trojan horse - will serve the same purpose. 

Law 13 

When Asking for Help, Appeal to People’s Self-Interest, 

Never to their Mercy or Gratitude 

If you need to turn to an ally for help, do not bother to remind him of your past assistance and 
good deeds. He will find a way to ignore you. Instead, uncover something in your request, or in 
your alliance with him, that will benefit him, and emphasize it out of all proportion. He will 
respond enthusiastically when he sees something to be gained for himself. 

Law 14 

Pose as a Friend, Work as a Spy 

Knowing about your rival is critical. Use spies to gather valuable information that will keep you 
a step ahead. Better still: Play the spy yourself. In polite social encounters, learn to probe. Ask 
indirect questions to get people to reveal their weaknesses and intentions. There is no occasion 
that is not an opportunity for artful spying. 


Law 15 


Crush your Enemy Totally 



All great leaders since Moses have known that a feared enemy must be crushed completely. 
(Sometimes they have learned this the hard way.) If one ember is left alight, no matter how 
dimly it smolders, a fire will eventually break out. More is lost through stopping halfway than 
through total annihilation: The enemy will recover, and will seek revenge. Crush him, not only 
in body but in spirit. 


Law 16 

Use Absence to Increase Respect and Honor 

Too much circulation makes the price go down: The more you are seen and heard from, the 
more common you appear. If you are already established in a group, temporary withdrawal from 
it will make you more talked about, even more admired. You must learn when to leave. Create 
value through scarcity. 


Law 17 

Keep Others in Suspended Terror: Cultivate an Air of Unpredictability 

Humans are creatures of habit with an insatiable need to see familiarity in other people’s 
actions. Your predictability gives them a sense of control. Turn the tables: Be deliberately 
unpredictable. Behavior that seems to have no consistency or purpose will keep them off- 
balance, and they will wear themselves out trying to explain your moves. Taken to an extreme, 
this strategy can intimidate and terrorize. 


Law 18 

Do Not Build Fortresses to Protect Yourself - Isolation is Dangerous 

The world is dangerous and enemies are everywhere - everyone has to protect themselves. A 
fortress seems the safest. But isolation exposes you to more dangers than it protects you from - it 
cuts you off from valuable information, it makes you conspicuous and an easy target. Better to 
circulate among people find allies, mingle. You are shielded from your enemies by the crowd. 

Law 19 

Know Who You’re Dealing with - Do Not Offend the Wrong Person 

There are many different kinds of people in the world, and you can never assume that everyone 
will react to your strategies in the same way. Deceive or outmaneuver some people and they will 
spend the rest of their lives seeking revenge. They are wolves in lambs’ clothing. Choose your 
victims and opponents carefully, then - never offend or deceive the wrong person. 

Law 20 


Do Not Commit to Anyone 



It is the fool who always rushes to take sides. Do not commit to any side or cause but yourself. 
By maintaining your independence, you become the master of others - playing people against 
one another, making them pursue you. 


Law 21 

Play a Sucker to Catch a Sucker - Seem Dumber than your Mark 

No one l ik es feeling stupider than the next persons. The trick, is to make your victims feel smart 
- and not just smart, but smarter than you are. Once convinced of this, they will never suspect 
that you may have ulterior motives. 


Law 22 

Use the Surrender Tactic: Transform Weakness into Power 

When you are weaker, never fight for honor’s sake; choose surrender instead. Surrender gives 
you time to recover, time to torment and irritate your conqueror, time to wait for his power to 
wane. Do not give him the satisfaction of fighting and defeating you - surrender first. By 
turning the other check you infuriate and unsettle him. Make surrender a tool of power. 

Law 23 

Concentrate Your Forces 

Conserve your forces and energies by keeping them concentrated at their strongest point. You 
gain more by finding a rich mine and mining it deeper, than by flitting from one shallow mine to 
another - intensity defeats extensity every time. When looking for sources of power to elevate 
you, find the one key patron, the fat cow who will give you milk for a long time to come. 

Law 24 

Play the Perfect Courtier 

The perfect courtier thrives in a world where everything revolves around power and political 
dexterity. He has mastered the art of indirection; he flatters, yields to superiors, and asserts 
power over others in the mot oblique and graceful manner. Learn and apply the laws of 
courtiership and there will be no limit to how far you can rise in the court. 

Law 25 

Re-Create Yourself 

Do not accept the roles that society foists on you. Re-create yourself by forging a new identity, 
one that commands attention and never bores the audience. Be the master of your own image 



rather than letting others define if for you. Incorporate dramatic devices into your public 
gestures and actions - your power will be enhanced and your character will seem larger than life. 

Law 26 

Keep Your Hands Clean 

You must seem a paragon of civility and efficiency: Your hands are never soiled by mistakes and 
nasty deeds. Maintain such a spotless appearance by using others as scapegoats and cat’s-paws 
to disguise your involvement. 


Law 27 

Play on People’s Need to Believe to Create a Cultlike Following 

People have an overwhelming desire to believe in something. Become the focal point of such 
desire by offering them a cause, a new faith to follow. Keep your words vague but full of 
promise; emphasize enthusiasm over rationality and clear thinking. Give your new disciples 
rituals to perform, ask them to make sacrifices on your behalf. In the absence of organized 
religion and grand causes, your new belief system will bring you untold power. 

Law 28 

Enter Action with Boldness 

If you are unsure of a course of action, do not attempt it. Your doubts and hesitations will infect 
your execution. Timidity is dangerous: Better to enter with boldness. Any mistakes you 
commit through audacity are easily corrected with more audacity. Everyone admires the bold; 
no one honors the timid. 


Law 29 

Plan All the Way to the End 

The ending is everything. Plan all the way to it, taking into account all the possible 
consequences, obstacles, and twists of fortune that might reverse your hard work and give the 
glory to others. By planning to the end you will not be overwhelmed by circumstances and you 
will know when to stop. Gently guide fortune and help determine the future by thinking far 
ahead. 


Law 30 

Make your Accomplishments Seem Effortless 

Your actions must seem natural and executed with ease. All the toil and practice that go into 
them, and also all the clever tricks, must be concealed. When you act, act effortlessly, as if you 



could do much more. Avoid the temptation of revealing how hard you work - it only raises 
questions. Teach no one your tricks or they will be used against you. 

Law 31 

Control the Options: Get Others to Play with the Cards you Deal 

The best deceptions are the ones that seem to give the other person a choice: Your victims feel 
they are in control, but are actually your puppets. Give people options that come out in your 
favor whichever one they choose. Force them to make choices between the lesser of two evils, 
both of which serve your purpose. Put them on the horns of a dilemma: They are gored 
wherever they turn. 


Law 32 

Play to People’s Fantasies 

The truth is often avoided because it is ugly and unpleasant. Never appeal to truth and reality 
unless you are prepared for the anger that comes for disenchantment. Life is so harsh and 
distressing that people who can manufacture romance or conjure up fantasy are l ik e oases in the 
desert: Everyone flocks to them. There is great power in tapping into the fantasies of the masses. 

Law 33 

Discover Each Man’s Thumbscrew 

Everyone has a weakness, a gap in the castle wall. That weakness is usual y an insecurity, an 
uncontrollable emotion or need; it can also be a small secret pleasure. Either way, once found, it 
is a thumbscrew you can turn to your advantage. 

Law 34 

Be Royal in your Own Fashion: Act like a King to be treated like one 

The way you carry yourself will often determine how you are treated; In the long run, appearing 
vulgar or common will make people disrespect you. For a king respects himself and inspires the 
same sentiment in others. By acting regally and confident of your powers, you make yourself 
seem destined to wear a crown. 


Law 35 

Master the Art of Timing 

Never seem to be in a hurry - hurrying betrays a lack of control over yourself, and over time. 
Always seem patient, as if you know that everything will come to you eventually. Become a 
detective of the right moment; sniff out the spirit of the times, the trends that will carry you to 



power. Learn to stand back when the time is not yet ripe, and to strike fiercely when it has 
reached fruition. 


Law 36 

Disdain Things you cannot have: Ignoring them is the best Revenge 

By acknowledging a petty problem you give it existence and credibility. The more attention you 
pay an enemy, the stronger you make him; and a small mistake is often made worse and more 
visible when you try to fix it. It is sometimes best to leave things alone. If there is something 
you want but cannot have, show contempt for it. The less interest you reveal, the more superior 
you seem. 


Law 37 

Create Compelling Spectacles 

Striking imagery and grand symbolic gestures create the aura of power - everyone responds to 
them. Stage spectacles for those around you, then full of arresting visuals and radiant symbols 
that heighten your presence. Dazzled by appearances, no one will notice what you are really 
doing. 


Law 38 

Think as you like but Behave like others 

If you make a show of going against the times, flaunting your unconventional ideas and 
unorthodox ways, people will think that you only want attention and that you look down upon 
them. They will find a way to punish you for making them feel inferior. It is far safer to blend 
in and nurture the common touch. Share your originality only with tolerant friends and those who 
are sure to appreciate your uniqueness. 


Law 39 

Stir up Waters to Catch Fish 

Anger and emotion are strategically counterproductive. You must always stay calm and 
objective. But if you can make your enemies angry while staying calm yourself, you gain a 
decided advantage. Put your enemies off-balance: Find the chink in their vanity through which 
you can rattle them and you hold the strings. 


Law 40 


Despise the Free Lunch 



What is offered for free is dangerous - it usually involves either a trick or a hidden obligation. 
What has worth is worth paying for. By paying your own way you stay clear of gratitude, guilt, 
and deceit. It is also often wise to pay the full price - there is no cutting corners with 
excellence. Be lavish with your money and keep it circulating, for generosity is a sign and a 
magnet for power. 


Law 41 

Avoid Stepping into a Great Man’s Shoes 

What happens first always appears better and more original than what comes after. If you 
succeed a great man or have a famous parent, you will have to accomplish double their 
achievements to outshine them. Do not get lost in their shadow, or stuck in a past not of your 
own making: Establish your own name and identity by changing course. Slay the overbearing 
father, disparage his legacy, and gain power by shining in your own way. 

Law 42 

Strike the Shepherd and the Sheep will Scatter 

Trouble can often be traced to a single strong individual - the stirrer, the arrogant underling, the 
poisoned of goodwill. If you allow such people room to operate, others will succumb to their 
influence. Do not wait for the troubles they cause to multiply, do not try to negotiate with them 
- they are irredeemable. Neutralize their influence by isolating or banishing them. Strike at the 
source of the trouble and the sheep will scatter. 

Law 43 

Work on the Hearts and Minds of Others 

Coercion creates a reaction that will eventually work against you. You must seduce others into 
wanting to move in your direction. A person you have seduced becomes your loyal pawn. And 
the way to seduce others is to operate on their individual psychologies and weaknesses. Soften 
up the resistant by working on their emotions, playing on what they hold dear and what they 
fear. Ignore the hearts and minds of others and they will grow to hate you. 

Law 44 

Disarm and Infuriate with the Mirror Effect 

The mirror reflects reality, but it is also the perfect tool for deception: When you mirror your 
enemies, doing exactly as they do, they cannot figure out your strategy. The Mirror Effect 
mocks and humiliates them, making them overreact. By holding up a mirror to their psyches, 
you seduce them with the illusion that you share their values; by holding up a mirror to their 
actions, you teach them a lesson. Few can resist the power of Mirror Effect. 



Law 45 


Preach the Need for Change, but Never Reform too much at Once 

Everyone understands the need for change in the abstract, but on the day-to-day level people are 
creatures of habit. Too much innovation is traumatic, and will lead to revolt. If you are new to a 
position of power, or an outsider trying to build a power base, make a show of respecting the old 
way of doing things. If change is necessary, make it feel like a gentle improvement on the past. 

Law 46 

Never appear too Perfect 

Appearing better than others is always dangerous, but most dangerous of all is to appear to have 
no faults or weaknesses. Envy creates silent enemies. It is smart to occasionally display defects, 
and admit to harmless vices, in order to deflect envy and appear more human and approachable. 
Only gods and the dead can seem perfect with impunity. 

Law 47 

Do not go Past the Mark you Aimed for; In Victory, Learn when to Stop 

The moment of victory is often the moment of greatest peril. In the heat of victory, arrogance 
and overconfidence can push you past the goal you had aimed for, and by going too far, you 
make more enemies than you defeat. Do not allow success to go to your head. There is no 
substitute for strategy and careful planning. Set a goal, and when you reach it, stop. 

Law 48 

Assume Formlessness 

By taking a shape, by having a visible plan, you open yourself to attack. Instead of taking a form 
for your enemy to grasp, keep yourself adaptable and on the move. Accept the fact that nothing 
is certain and no law is fixed. The best way to protect yourself is to be as fluid and formless as 
water; never bet on stability or lasting order. Everything changes. 


plane  of  the  ecliptic,  as  do  the  satellites  of  the  other  planets, 
their  orbit  planes  are  tipped  up  nearly  perpendicular  to  the 
planes  of  the  orbits  of  both  Uranus  and  the  earth.  The 
one  satellite  which  Neptune  possesses  has  the  same  pecul- 
iarity in  even  greater  degree,  for  its  motion  around  the 
planet  takes  place  in  the  direction  opposite  to  that  in 
which  all  the  planets  move  around  the  sun,  much  as  if  the 
orbit  of  the  satellite  had  been  tipped  over  through  an  angle 
of  150°.  Turn  a  watch  face  down  and  note  how  the  hands 
go  round  in  the  direction  opposite  to  that  in  which  they 
moved  before  the  face  was  turned  through  180°. 

Both  Uranus  and  Neptune  are  too  distant  to  allow 
much  detail  to  be  seen  upon  their  surfaces,  but  the  pres- 
ence of  broad  absorption  bands  in  their  spectra  shows  that 
they  must  possess  dense  atmospheres  quite  different  in  con- 
stitution from  the  atmosphere  of  the  earth.  In  respect  of 
density  and  the  force  of  gravity  at  their  surfaces,  they  are 
not  very  unlike  Saturn,  although  their  density  is  greater 
and  gravity  less  than  his,  leading  to  the  supposition  that 
they  are  for  the  most  part  gaseous  bodies,  but  cooler  and 
probably  more  nearly  solid  than  either  Jupiter  or  Saturn. 

Under  favorable  circumstances  Uranus  may  be  seen 
with  the  naked  eye  by  one  who  knows  just  where  to  look 
for  it.  Neptune  is  never  visible  save  in  a  telescope. 

147.  The  inner  planets. — In  sharp  contrast  with  the  giant 
planets  which  we  have  been  considering  stands  the  group 
of  four  inner  planets,  or  five  if  we  count  the  moon  as  an 
independent  body,  which  resemble  each  other  in  being  all 
small,  dense,  and  solid  bodies,  which  by  comparison  with 
the  great  distances  separating  the  outer  planets  may  fairly 
be  described  as  huddled  together  close  to  the  sun.  Their 
relative  sizes  are  shown  in  Fig.  84,  together  with  the  nu- 
merical data  concerning  size,  mass,  density,  etc.,  which  we 
have  already  found  important  for  the  understanding  of  a 
planet's  physical  condition. 


236 


ASTRONOMY 


VENUS 

148.  Appearance,— Omitting  the  earth,  Venus  is  by  far 
the  most  conspicuous  member  of  this  group,  and  when  at  its 
brightest  is,  with  exception  of  the  sun  and  moon,  the  most 
brilliant  object  in  the  sky,  and  may  be  seen  with  the  naked 
eye  in  broad  daylight  if  the  observer  knows  just  where  to 
look  for  it.  But  its  brilliancy  is  subject  to  considerable 
variations  on  account  of  its  changing  distance  from  the 


FIG.  94. — The  phases  of  Venus. — ANTONIADI. 

earth,  and  the  apparent  size  of  its  disk  varies  for  the  same 
reason,  as  may  be  seen  from  Fig.  94.  These  drawings  bring 
out  well  the  phases  of  the  planet,  and  the  student  should 
determine  from  Fig.  17  what  are  the  relative  positions  in 
their  orbits  of  the  earth  and  Venus  at  which  the  planet 
would  present  each  of  these  phases.  As  a  guide  to  this, 
observe  that  the  dark  part  of  Venus's  earthward  side  is 
always  proportional  in  area  to  the  angle  at  Venus  between 
the  earth  and  sun.  In  the  first  picture  of  Fig.  94  about 


THE   PLANETS  237 

two  thirds  of  the  surface  corresponding  to  the  full  hemi- 
sphere of  the  planet  is  dark,  and  the  angle  at  Venus 
between  earth  and  sun  is  therefore  two  thirds  of  180° — i.  e., 
120°.  In  Fig.  17  find  a  place  on  the  orbit  of  Venus  from 
which  if  lines  be  drawn  to  the  sun  and  earth,  as  there 
shown,  the  angle  between  them  will  be  120°.  Make  a  simi- 
lar construction  for  the  fourth  picture  in  Fig.  94.  Which 
of  these  two  positions  is  farther  from  the  earth  ?  How  do 
the  distances  compare  with  the  apparent  size  of  Venus  in 
the  two  pictures  ?  What  is  the  phase  of  Venus  to-day  ? 

The  irregularities  in  the  shading  of  the  illuminated 
parts  of  the  disk  are  too  conspicuous  in  Fig.  94,  on  account 
of  difficulties  of  reproduction;  these  shadings  are  at  the 
best  hard  to  see  in  the  telescope,  and  distinct  permanent 
markings  upon  the  planet  are  wholly  lacking.  This  absence 
of  markings  makes  almost  impossible  a  determination  of 
the  planet's  time  of  rotation  about  its  axis,  and -astrono- 
mers are  divided  in  this  respect  into  two  parties,  one  of 
which  maintains  that  Venus,  like  the  earth,  turns  upon  its 
axis  in  some  period  not  very  different  from  24  hours,  while 
the  other  contends  that,  like  the  moon,  it  turns  always  the 
same  face  toward  the  center  of  its  orbit,  making  a  rotation 
upon  its  axis  in  the  same  period  in  which  it  makes  a  revo- 
lution about  the  sun.  The  reason  why  no  permanent  mark- 
ings are  to  be  seen  on  this  planet  is  easily  found.  Like 
Jupiter  and  Saturn,  its  atmosphere  is  at  all  times  heavily 
cloud-laden,  so  that  we  seldom,  if  ever,  see  down  to  the 
level  of  its  solid  parts.  There  is,  however,  no  reason  here 
to  suppose  the  interior  parts  hot  and  gaseous.  It  is  much 
more  probable  that  Venus,  like  the  earth,  possesses  a  solid 
crust  whose  temperature  we  should  expect  to  be  consider- 
ably higher  than  that  of  the  earth,  because  Venus  is  nearer 
the  sun.  But  the  cloud  layer  in  its  atmosphere  must  modify 
the  temperature  in  some  degree,  and  we  have  practically 
no  knowledge  of  the  real  temperature  conditions  at  the 
surface  of  the  planet. 


238  ASTRONOMY 

It  is  the  clouds  of  Venus  which  in  great  measure  are 
responsible  for  its  marked  brilliancy,  since  they  are  an  ex- 
cellent medium  for  reflecting  the  sunlight,  and  give  to  its 
surface  an  albedo  greater  than  that  of  any  other  planet, 
although  Saturn  is  nearly  equal  to  it. 

Of  course,  the  presence  of  such  cloud  formations  indi- 
cates that  Venus  is  surrounded  by  a  dense  atmosphere,  and 
we  have  independent  evidence  of  this  in  the  shape  of  its 
disk  when  the  planet  is  very  nearly  between  the  earth  and 
sun.  The  illuminated  part,  from  tip  to  tip  of  the  horns? 
then  stretches  more  than  halfway  around  the  planet's  cir- 
cumference, and  shows  that  a  certain  amount  of  light  must 
have  been  refracted  through  its  atmosphere,  thus  making 
the  horns  of  the  crescent  appear  unduly  prolonged.  This 
atmosphere  is  shown  by  the  spectroscope  to  be  not  unlike 
that  of  the  earth,  although  probably  more  dense. 

MERCURY 

149.  Chief  characteristics. — Mercury,  on  account  of  its 
nearness  to  the  sun,  is  at  all  times  a  difficult  object  to  ob- 
serve, and  Copernicus,  who  spent  most  of  his  life  in  Poland, 
is  said,  despite  all  his  efforts,  to  have  gone  to  his  grave  with- 
out ever  seeing  it.  In  our  more  southern  latitude  it  can 
usually  be  seen  for  about  a  fortnight  at  the  time  of  each 
elongation — i.  e.,  when  at  its  greatest  angular  distance  from 
the  sun — and  the  student  should  find  from  Fig.  16  the  time 
at  which  the  next  elongation  occurs  and  look  for  the  planet, 
shining  like  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude,  low  down  in  the 
sky  just  after  sunset  or  before  sunrise,  according  as  the 
elongation  is  to  the  east  or  west  of  the  sun.  When  seen  in 
the  morning  sky  the  planet  grows  brighter  day  after  day 
until  it  disappears  in  the  sun's  rays,  while  in  the  evening 
sky  its  brilliancy  as  steadily  diminishes  until  the  planet  is 
lost.  It  should  therefore  be  looked  for  in  the  evening  as 
soon  as  possible  after  it  emerges  from  the  sun's  rays. 

Mercury,  as  the  smallest  of  the  planets,  is  best  compared 


THE  PLANETS  239 

with  the  moon,  which  it  does  not  greatly  surpass  in  size 
and  which  it  strongly  resembles  in  other  respects.  Careful 
comparisons  of  the  amount  of  light  reflected  by  the  planet 
in  different  parts  of  its  orbit  show  not  only  that  its  albedo 
agrees  very  closely  with  that  of  the  moon,  but  also  that  its 
light  changes  with  the  varying  phase  of  the  planet  in  al- 
most exactly  the  same  way  as  the  amount  of  moonlight 
changes.  We  may  therefore  infer  that  its  surface  is  like 
that  of  the  moon,  a  rough  and  solid  one,  with  few  or  no 
clouds  hanging  over  it,  and  most  probably  covered  with 
very  little  or  no  atmosphere.  Like  Venus,  its  rotation  pe- 
riod is  uncertain,  with  the  balance  of  probability  favoring 
the  view  that  it  rotates  upon  its  axis  once  in  88  days,  and 
therefore  always  turns  the  same  face  toward  the  sun. 

If  such  is  the  case,  its  climate  must  be  very  peculiar : 
one  side  roasted  in  a  perpetual  day,  where  the  direct  heat- 
ing power  of  the  sun's  rays,  when  the  planet  is  at  perihelion, 
is  ten  times  as  great  as  on  the  moon,  and  which  six  weeks 
later,  when  the  planet  is  at  its  farthest  from  the  sun,  has 
fallen  off  to  less  than  half  of  this.  On  the  opposite  side  of 
the  planet  there  must  reign  perpetual  night  and  perpetual 
cold,  mitigated  by  some  slight  access  of  warmth  from  the 
day  side,  and  perhaps  feebly  imitating  the  rapid  change  of 
season  which  takes  place  on  the  day  side  of  the  planet. 
This  view,  however,  takes  no  account  of  a  possible  devia- 
tion of  the  planet's  axis  from  being  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  its  orbit,  or  of  the  librations  which  must  be  pro- 
duced by  the  great  eccentricity  of  the  orbit,  either  of  which 
would  complicate  without  entirely  destroying  the  ideal 
conditions  outlined  above. 

MAKS 

150.  Appearance. — The  one  remaining  member  of  the 
inner  group,  Mars,  has  in  recent  years  received  more  atten- 
tion than  any  other  planet,  and  the  newspapers  and  maga- 
zines have  announced  marvelous  things  concerning  it :  that 


240 


ASTRONOMY 


it  is  inhabited  by  a  race  of  beings  superior  in  intelligence 
to  men  ;  that  the  work  of  their  hands  may  be  seen  upon 
the  face  of  the  planet ;  that  we  should  endeavor  to  com- 
municate with  them,  if  indeed  they  are  not  already  sending 
messages  to  us,  etc. — all  of  which  is  certainly  important, 
if  true,  but  it  rests  upon  a  very  slender  foundation  of  evi- 
dence, a  part  of  which  we  shall  have  to  consider. 

Beginning  with  facts  of  which  there  is  no  doubt,  this 
ruddy-colored  planet,  which  usually  shines  about  as  brightly 

as  a  star  of  the  first  mag- 
nitude, sometimes  dis- 
plays more  than  tenfold 
this  brilliancy,  surpass- 
ing every  other  planet 
save  Venus  and  present- 
ing at  these  times  espe- 
cially favorable  opportu- 
nities for  the  study  of 
its  surface.  The  expla- 
nation of  this  increase 
of  brilliancy  is,  of  course, 
that  the  planet  approach- 
es unusually  near  to  the 
earth,  and  we  have  al- 
ready seen  from  a  con- 
sideration of  Fig.  17 
that  this  can  only  hap- 
pen in  the  months  of  August  and  September.  The  last 
favorable  epoch  of  this  kind  was  in  1894.  From  Fig.  17 
the  student  should  determine  when  the  next  one  will 
come. 

Fig.  95  presents  nine  drawings  of  the  planet  made  at 
one  of  the  epochs  of  close  approach  to  the  earth,  and  shows 
that  its  face  bears  certain  faint  markings  which,  though 
inconspicuous,  are  fixed  and  permanent  features  of  the 
planet.  The  dark  triangular  projection  in  the  lower  half 


FIG.  95.— Mars.— SCHAEBERLE. 


THE   PLANETS 


241 


of  the  second  drawing  was  seen  and  sketched  by  Huyghens. 
1659  A.  D.  In  Fig.  96  some  of  these  markings  are  shown 
much  more  plainly,  but  Fig.  95  gives  a  better  idea  of  their 
usual  appearance  in  the  telescope. 

151.  Rotation. — It  may  be  seen  readily  enough,  from  a 
comparison  of  the  first  two  sketches  of  Fig.  95,  that  the 
planet  rotates  about  an 
axis,  and  from  a  more 
extensive  study  it  is 
found  to  be  very  like 
the  earth  in  this  re- 
spect, turning  once  in 
24h.  37m.  around  an 
axis  tipped  from  being 
perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  its  orbit  about 
a  degree  and  a  half 
more  than  is  the  earth's 
axis.  Since  it  is  this 
inclination  of  the  axis 
which  is  the  cause  of 
changing  seasons  upon 
the  earth,  there  must 
be  similar  changes, 

winter  and  summer,  as  well  as  day  and  night,  upon  Mars, 
only  each  season  is  longer  there  than  here  in  the  same  pro- 
portion that  its  year  is  longer  than  ours — i.  e.,  nearly  two 
to  one.  It  is  summer  in  the  northern  hemisphere  of  Mars 
whenever  the  sun,  as  seen  from  Mars,  stands  in  that  con- 
stellation which  is  nearest  the  point  of  the  sky  toward 
which  the  planet's  axis  points.  But  this  axis  points  toward 
the  constellation  Cygnus,  and  Alpha  Cygni  is  the  bright 
star  nearest  the  north  pole  of  Mars.  As  Pisces  is  the 
zodiacal  constellation  nearest  to  Cygnus,  it  must  be  sum- 
mer in  the  northern  hemisphere  of  Mars  when  the  sun  is  in 
Pisces,  or,  turning  the  proposition  about,  it  must  be  summer 


FIG.  96.— Four  views  of  Mars  differing  90°  in 
longitude. — BARNARD. 


242 


ASTRONOMY 


in  the  southern  hemisphere  of  Mars  when  the  planet,  as 
seen  from  the  sun,  lies  in  the  direction  of  Pisces. 

152.  The  polar  caps. — One  effect  of  the  changing  seasons 
upon  Mars  is  shown  in  Fig.  97,  where  we  have  a  series  of 
drawings  of  the  region  about  its  south  pole  made  in  1894, 
on  dates  between  May  21st  and  December  10th.  Show 
from  Fig.  16  that  during  this  time  it  was  summer  in  the 
region  here  shown.  Mars  crossed  the  prime  radius  in  1894 
on  September  5th.  The  striking  thing  in  these  pictures  is 
the  white  spot  surrounding  the  pole,  which  shrinks  in  size 

from  the  beginning  to 
near  the  end  of  the  se- 
ries, and  then  disappears 
altogether.  The  spot 
came  back  again  a  year 
later,  and  like  a  similar 
spot  at  the  north  pole  of 
the  planet  it  waxes  in  the 
winter  and  wanes  during 
the  summer  of  Mars  in 
endless  succession. 

Sir  W.  Herschel,  who 
studied  these  appear- 
ances a  century  ago,  com- 
pared them  with  the  snow 
fields  which  every  winter 

FIG.  97.— The  south  polar  cap  of  Mars  in  ..  .  , 

1894.-BABNARD.  spread  out  from  the  re- 

gion around  the  terres- 
trial pole,  and  in  the  summer  melt  and  shrink,  although 
with  us  they  do  not  entirely  disappear.  This  explanation  of 
the  polar  caps  of  Mars  has  been  generally  accepted  among 
astronomers,  and  from  it  we  may  draw  one  interesting  con- 
clusion :  the  temperature  upon  Mars  between  summer  and 
winter  oscillates  above  and  below  the  freezing  point  of 
water,  as  it  does  in  the  temperate  zones  of  the  earth.  But 
this  conclusion  plunges  us  into  a  serious  difficulty.  The 


THE  PLANETS  243 

temperature  of  the  earth  is  made  by  the  sun,  and  at  the 
distance  of  Mars  from  the  sun  the  heating  effect  of  the 
latter  is  reduced  to  less  than  half  what  it  is  at  the  earth, 
so  that,  if  Mars  is  to  be  kept  at  the  same  temperature  as 
the  earth,  there  must  be  some  peculiar  means  for  storing 
the  solar  heat  and  using  it  more  economically  than  is  done 
here.  Possibly  there  is  some  such  mechanism,  although 
no  one  has  yet  found  it,  and  some  astronomers  are  very 
confident  that  it  does  not  exist,  and  assert  that  the  com- 
parison of  the  polar  caps  with  snow  fields  is  misleading, 
and  that  the  temperature  upon  Mars  must  be  at  least  100°, 
and  perhaps  200°  or  more,  below  zero. 

153.  Atmosphere  and  climate. — In  this  connection  one 
feature  of  Mars  is  of  importance.  The  markings  upon  its 
surface  are  always  visible  when  turned  toward  the  earth, 
thus  showing  that  the  atmosphere  contains  no  such  amount 
of  cloud  as  does  our  own,  but  on  the  whole  is  decidedly 
clear  and  sunny,  and  presumably  much  less  dense  than 
ours.  AVe  have  seen  in  comparing  the  earth  and  the  moon 
how  important  is  the  service  which  the  earth's  atmosphere 
renders  in  storing  the  sun's  heat  and  checking  those  great 
vicissitudes  of  temperature  to  which  the  moon  is  subject ; 
and  with  this  in  mind  we  must  regard  the  smaller  density 
and  cloudless  character  of  the  atmosphere  of  Mars  as  un- 
favorable to  the  maintenance  there  of  a  temperature  like 
that  of  the  earth.  Indeed,  this  cloudlessness  must  mean 
one  of  two  things :  either  the  temperature  is  so  low  that 
vapors  can  not  exist  in  any  considerable  quantity,  or  the 
surface  of  Mars  is  so  dry  that  there  is  little  water  or  other 
liquid  to  be  evaporated.  The  latter  alternative  is  adopted 
by  those  astronomers  who  look  upon  the  polar  caps  as  true 
snow  fields,  which  serve  as  the  chief  reservoir  of  the  planet's 
water  supply,  and  who  find  in  Fig.  98  evidence  that  as  the 
snow  melts  and  the  water  flows  away  over  the  flat,  dry  sur- 
face of  the  planet,  vegetation  springs  up,  as  shown  by  the 
dark  markings  on  the  disk,  and  gradually  dies  out  with 


244 


ASTRONOMY 


the  advancing  season.  Note  that  in  the  first  of  these  pic- 
tures the  season  upon  Mars  corresponds  to  the  end  of  May 
with  us,  and  in  the  last  picture  to  the  beginning  of  August, 
a  period  during  which  in  much  of  our  western  country  the 
luxuriant  vegetation  of  spring  is  burned  out  by  the  scorch- 
ing sun.  From  this  point  of  view  the  permanent  dark 
spots  are  the  low-lying  parts  of  the  planet's  surface,  in 
which  at  all  times  there  is  a  sufficient  accumulation  of 
water  to  support  vegetable  life. 

154.  The  canals.— In  Fig.  98  the  lower  part  of  the  disk 
of  Mars  shows  certain  faint  dark  lines  which  are  generally 
called  canals,  and  in  Plate  III  there  is  given  a  map  of  Mars 


FIG.  98.— The  same  face  of  Mars  at  three  different  seasons.— LOWELL. 

showing  many  of  these  canals  running  in  narrow,  dusky 
streaks  across  the  face  of  the  planet  according  to  a  pattern 
almost  as  geometrical  as  that  of  a  spider's  web.  This  must 
not  be  taken  for  a  picture  of  the  planet's  appearance  in  a 
telescope.  No  man  ever  saw  Mars  look  like  this,  but  the 
map  is  useful  as  a  plain  representation  of  things  dimly 
seen.  Some  of  the  regions  of  this  map  are  marked  Mare 
(sea),  in  accordance  with  the  older  view  which  regarded 
the  darker  parts  of  the  planet — and  of  themotm— as  bodies 
of  water,  but  this  is  now  known  to  be  an  error  in  both 
cases.  The  curved  surface  of  a  planet  can  not  be  accurately 
reproduced  upon  the  flat  surface  of  paper,  but  ifi  always 
more  or  less  distorted  by  the  various  methods  of/"  project- 
ing "  it  which  are  in  use.  Compare  the  map/of  Mars  in 


THE  PLANETS  245 

Plate  III  with  Fig.  99,  in  which  the  projection  represents 
very  well  the  equatorial  parts  of  the  planet,  but  enormously 
exaggerates  the  region  arou  nd  the  poles. 

It  is  a  remarkable  feature  of  the  canals  that  they  all 
begin  and  end  in  one  of  these  dark  parts  of  the  planetV 
surface ;  they  show  no  loose  ends  lying  on  the  bright  parts 
of  the  planet.  Another  even  more  remarkable  feature  is 
that  while  the  larger  canals  are  permanent  features  of  the 
planet's  surface,  they  at  times  appear  "  doubled  " — i.  e.,  in 
place  of  one  canal  two  parallel  ones  side  by  side,  lasting 
for  a  time  and  then  giving  place  again  to  a  single  canal. 

It  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  frame  any  reasonable  ex- 
planation of  these  canals  and  the  varied  appearances  which 
they  present.  The  source  of  the  wild  speculations  about 
Mars,  to  which  reference  is  made  above,  is  to  be  found  in 
the  suggestion  frequently  made,  half  in  jest  and  half  in 
earnest,  that  the  canals  are  artificial  water  courses  con- 
structed upon  a  scale  vastly  exceeding  any  public  works 
upon  the  earth,  and  testifying  to  the  presence  in  Mars  of 
an  advanced  civilization.  The  distinguished  Italian  as- 
tronomer, Schiaparelli,  who  has  studied  these  formations 
longer  than  any  one  else,  seems  inclined  to  regard  them  as 
water  courses  lined  on  either  side  by  vegetation,  which 
flourishes  as  far  back  from  the  central  channel  as  water 
can  be  supplied  from  it — a  plausible  enough  explanation  if 
the  fundamental  difficulty  about  temperature  can  be  over- 
come. 

155.  Satellites. — In  1877,  one  of  the  times  of  near  ap- 
proach, Professor  Hall,  of  Washington,  discovered  two  tiny 
satellites  revolving  about  Mars  in  orbits  so  small  that  the 
nearer  one,  Phobos,  presents  the  remarkable  anomaly  of 
completing  the  circuit  of  its  orbit  in  less  time  than  the 
planet  takes  for  a  rotation  about  its  axis.  This  satellite,  in 
fact,  makes  three  revolutions  in  its  orbit  while  the  planet 
turns  once  upon  its  axis,  and  it  therefore  rises  in  the  west 
and  sets  in  the  east,  as  seen  from  Mars,  going  from  one 


3 S       SS?g2o2SS?3S? 


THE  PLANETS  247 

horizon  to  the  other  in  a  little  less  than  6  hours.  The 
other  satellite,  Deimos,  takes  a  few  hours  more  than  a  day 
to  make  the  circuit  of  its  orhit,  but  the  difference  is  so 
small  that  it  remains  continuously  above  the  horizon  of 
any  given  place  upon  Mars  for  more  than  60  hours  at  a 
time,  and  during  this  period  runs  twice  through  its  com- 
plete set  of  phases — new,  first  quarter,  full,  etc.  In  ordi- 
nary telescopes  these  satellites  can  be  seen  only  under  espe- 
cially favorable  circumstances,  and  are  far  too  small  to 
permit  of  any  direct  measurement  of  their  size.  The 
amount  of  light  which  they  reflect  has  been  compared 
with  that  of  Mars  and  found  to  be  as  much  inferior  to  it 
as  is  Polaris  to  two  full  moons,  and,  judging  from  this  com- 
parison, their  diameters  can  not  much  exceed  a  half  dozen 
miles,  unless  their  albedo  is  far  less  than  that  of  Mars, 
which  does  not  seem  probable. 

THE  ASTEKOIDS 

156.  Minor  planets. — These  may  be  dismissed  with  few 
words.  There  are  about  500  of  them  known,  all  discovered 
since  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  new 
ones  are  still  found  every  year.  No  one  pretends  to 
remember  the  names  which  have  been  assigned  them,  and 
they  are  commonly  represented  by  a  number  inclosed  in  a 
circle,  showing  the  order  in  which  they  were  discovered — 
e.  g.,  Q  =  Ceres,  @  —  Eros,  etc.  For  the  most  part  they 
are  little  more  than  chips,  world  fragments,  adrift  in  space, 
and  naturally  it  was  the  larger  and  brighter  of  them  that 
were  first  discovered.  The  size  of  the  first  four  of  them — 
Ceres,  Pallas,  Juno,  and  Vesta — compared  with  the  size  of 
the  moon,  according  to  Professor  Barnard,  is  shown  in  Fig. 
100.  The  great  majority  of  them  must  be  much  smaller 
than  the  smallest  of  these,  perhaps  not  more  than  a  score 
of  miles  in  diameter. 

A  few  of  the  asteroids  present  problems  of  special  in- 
terest, such  as  Eros,  on  account  of  its  close  approach  to  the 


248 


ASTRONOMY 


earth ;  Polyhymnia,  whose  very  eccentric  orbit  makes  it  a 
valuable  means  for  determining  the  mass  of  Jupiter,  etc.; 
but  these  are  special  cases  and  the  average  asteroid  now 
receives  scant  attention,  although  half  a  century  ago,  when 
only  a  few  of  them  were  known,  they  were  regarded  with 
much  interest,  and  the  discovery  of  a  new  one  was  an  event 
of  some  consequence. 

It  was  then  a  favorite  speculation  that  they  were  in  fact 
fragments  of  an  ill-fated  planet  which  once  filled  the  gap 

between  the  orbits  of  Mars 
and  Jupiter,  but  which,  by 
some  mischance,  had  been 
blown  into  pieces.  This  is 
now  known  to  be  well-nigh 
impossible,  for  every  frag- 
ment which  after  the  explo- 
sion moved  in  an  elliptical 
orbit,  as  all  the  asteroids  do 
move,  would  be  brought 
back  once  in  every  revolu- 
tion to  the  place  of  the  ex- 
plosion, and  all  the  asteroid 
orbits  must  therefore  inter- 
sect at  this  place.  But  there  is  no  such  common  point  of 
intersection. 

157.  Life  on  the  planets. — There  is  a  belief  firmly 
grounded  in  the  popular  mind,  and  not  without  its  ad- 
vocates among  professional  astronomers,  that  the  planets 
are  inhabited  by  living  and  intelligent  beings,  and  it  seems 
proper  at  the  close  of  this  chapter  to  inquire  briefly  how 
far  the  facts  and  principles  here  developed  are  consistent 
with  this  belief,  and  what  support,  if  any,  they  lend  to  it. 

At  the  outset  we  must  observe  that  the  word  life  is  an 
elastic  term,  hard  to  define  in  any  satisfactory  way,  and  yet 
standing  for  something  which  we  know  here  upon  the 
earth.  It  is  this  idea,  our  familiar  though  crude  knowl- 


FIG.  100.— The  size  of  the  first  four 
asteroids. — BARNARD. 


THE  PLANETS  249 

edge  of  life,  which  lies  at  the  root  of  the  matter.  Life,  if 
it  exists  in  another  planet,  must  be  in  its  essential  char- 
acter like  life  upon  the  earth,  and  must  at  least  possess 
those  features  which  are  common  to  all  forms  of  terrestrial 
life.  It  is  an  abuse  of  language  to  say  that  life  in  Mars- 
may  be  utterly  unlike  life  in  the  earth ;  if  it  is  absolutely 
unlike,  it  is  not  life,  whatever  else  it  may  be.  Now,  every 
form  of  life  found  upon  the  earth  has  for  its  physical  basis 
a  certain  chemical  compound,  called  protoplasm,  which 
can  exist  and  perpetuate  itself  only  within  a  narrow  range 
of  temperature,  roughly  speaking,  between  0°  and  100° 
centigrade,  although  these  limits  can  be  considerably  over- 
stepped for  short  periods  of  time.  Moreover,  this  proto- 
plasm can  be  active  only  in  the  presence  of  water,  or  water 
vapor,  and  we  may  therefore  establish  as  the  necessary  con- 
ditions for  the  continued  existence  and  reproduction  of 
life  in  any  place  that  its  temperature  must  not  be  perma- 
nently above  100°  or  below  0°,  C.,  and  water  must  be  pres- 
ent in  that  place  in  some  form. 

With  these  conditions  before  us  it  is  plain  that  life  can 
not  exist  in  the  sun  on  account  of  its  high  temperature. 
It  is  conceivable  that  active  and  intelligent  beings,  salaman- 
ders, might  exist  there,  but  they  could  not  properly  be  said 
to  live.  In  Jupiter  and  Saturn  the  same  condition  of  high 
temperature  prevails,  and  probably  also  in  Uranus  and 
Xeptune,  so  that  it  seems  highly  improbable  that  any  of 
these  planets  should  be  the  home  of  life. 

Of  the  inner  planets,  Mercury  and  the  moon  seem  desti- 
tute of  any  considerable  atmospheres,  and  are  therefore 
lacking  in  the  supply  of  water  necessary  for  life,  and  the 
same  is  almost  certainly  true  of  all  the  asteroids.  There 
remain  Venus,  Mars,  and  the  satellites  of  the  outer  planets, 
which  latter,  however,  we  must  drop  from  consideration  as 
being  too  little  known.  On  Venus  there  is  an  atmosphere 
probably  containing  vapor  of  water,  and  it  is  well  within 
the  range  of  possibility  that  liquid  water  should  exist  upon 
17 


250  ASTRONOMY 

the  surface  of  this  planet  and  that  its  temperature  should 
fall  within  the  prescribed  limits.  It  would,  however,  be 
straining  our  actual  knowledge  to  affirm  that  such  is  the 
case,  or  to  insist  that  if  such  were  the  case,  life  would  ne- 
cessarily exist  upon  the  planet. 

On  Mars  we  encounter  the  fundamental  difficulty  of 
temperature  already  noted  in  §  152.  If  in  some  unknown 
way  the  temperature  is  maintained  sufficiently  high  for  the 
polar  caps  to  be  real  snow,  thawing  and  forming  again  with 
the  progress  of  the  seasons,  the  necessary  conditions  of  life 
would  seem  to  be  fulfilled  here  and  life  if  once  introduced 
upon  the  planet  might  abide  and  flourish.  But  of  positive 
proof  that  such  is  the  case  we  have  none. 

On  the  whole,  our  survey  lends  little  encouragement  to 
the  belief  in  planetary  life,  for  aside  from  the  earth,  of  all 
the  hundreds  of  bodies  in  the  solar  system,  not  one  is  found 
in  which  the  necessary  conditions  of  life  are  certainly  ful- 
filled, and  only  two  exist  in  which  there  is  a  reasonable 
probability  that  these  conditions  may  be  satisfied. 


CHAPTEE  XII 

COMETS    AND    METEORS 

158.  Visitors  in  the  solar  system.— All  of  the  objects — 
sun,  moon,  planets,  stars — which  we  have  thus  far  had  to 
consider,  are  permanent  citizens  of  the  sky,  and  we  have  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  their  present  appearance  differs  ap- 
preciably from  what  it  was  1,000  years  or  10,000  years  ago. 
But  there  is  another  class  of  objects — comets,  meteors — 
which  appear  unexpectedly,  are  visible  for  a  time,  and  then 
vanish  and  are  seen  no  more.  On  account  of  this  temporary 
character  the  astronomers  of  ancient  and  mediaeval  times 
for  the  most  part  refused  to  regard  them  as  celestial  bodies 
but  classed  them  along  with  clouds,  fogs,  Jack-o'-lanterns, 
and  fireflies,  as  exhalations  from  the  swamps  or  the  vol- 
cano ;  admitting  them  to  be  indeed  important  as  harbingers 
of  evil  to  mankind,  but  having  no  especial  significance  for 
the  astronomer. 

The  comet  of  1018  A.  D.  inspired  the  lines — 

"  Eight  things  there  be  a  Comet  brings, 
When  it  on  high  doth  horrid  range  : 
Wind,  Famine,  Plague,  and  Death  to  Kings, 

War,  Earthquakes,  Floods,  and  Direful  Change," 

which,  according  to  White  (History  of  the  Doctrine  of 
Comets),  were  to  be  taught  in  all  seriousness  to  peasants 
and  school  children. 

It  was  by  slow  degrees,  and  only  after  direct  measure- 
ments of  parallax  had  shown  some  of  them  to  be  more  dis- 
tant than  the  moon,  that  the  tide  of  old  opinion  was  turned 
and  comets  were  transferred  from  the  sublunary  to  the 

251 


252 


ASTRONOMY 


celestial  sphere,  and  in  more  recent  times  meteors  also 
have  been  recognized  as  coming  to  us  from  outside  the 
earth.  A  meteor,  or  shooting  star  as  it  is  often  called,  is 
one  of  the  commonest  of  phenomena,  and  one  can  hardly 
watch  the  sky  for  an  hour  on  any  clear  and  moonless  night 
without  seeing  several  of  those  quick  flashes  of  light  which 
look  as  if  some  star  had  suddenly  left  its  place,  dashed 
swiftly  across  a  portion  of  the  sky  and  then  vanished.  It 
is  this  misleading  appearance  that  prohably  is  responsible 
for  the  name  shooting  star. 

159.  Comets, — Comets  are  less  common  and  much  longer- 
lived  than  meteors,  lasting  usually  for  several  weeks,  and 
may  be  visible  night  after  night  for  many  months,  but 
never  for  many  years,  at  a  time.  During  the  last  decade 


FIG.  101.— Douati's  comet.— BOND. 


there  is  no  year  in  which  less  than  three  comets  have 
appeared,  and  1898  is  distinguished  by  the  discovery  of 
ten  of  these  bodies,  the  largest  number  ever  found  in 
one  year.  On  the  average,  we  may  expect  a  new  comet  to 


COMETS  AND  METEORS 


253 


be  found  about  once  in  every  ten  weeks,  but  for  the  most 
part  they  are  small  affairs,  visible  only  in  the  telescope,  and 
a  fine  large  one,  like  Donati's  comet  of  1858  (Fig.  101),  or 
the  Great  Comet  of  Septem- 
ber, 1882,  which  was  visible  in 
broad  daylight  close  beside  the 
sun,  is  a  rare  spectacle,  and  as 
striking  and  impressive  as  it 
is  rare. 

Note  in  Fig.  102  the  great 
variety  of  aspect  presented 
by  some  of  the  more  famous 
comets,  which  are  here  repre- 
sented upon  a  very  small  scale. 

Fig.  103  is  from  a  photo- 
graph of  one  of  the  faint 
comets  of  the  year  1893,  which 
appears  here  as  a  rather  feeble 
streak  of  light  amid  the  stars 
which  are  scattered  over  the 
background  of  the  picture. 

An  apparently  detached  portion  of  this  comet  is  shown  at 
the  extreme  left  of  the  picture,  looking  almost  like  another 
independent  comet.  The  clean,  straight  line  running  diag- 
onally across  the  picture  is  the  flash  of  a  bright  meteor 
that  chanced  to  pass  within  the  range  of  the  camera  while 
the  comet  was  being  photographed. 

A  more  striking  representation  of  a  moderately  bright 
telescopic  comet  is  contained  in  Figs.  104  and  105,  which 
present  two  different  views  of  the  same  comet,  showing  a 
considerable  change  in  its  appearance.  A  striking  feature 
of  Fig.  105  is  the  star  images,  which  are  here  drawn  out  into 
short  lines  all  parallel  with  each  other.  During  the  expos- 
ure of  2h.  20m.  required  to  imprint  this  picture  upon  the 
photographic  plate,  the  comet  was  continually  changing  its 
position  among  the  stars  on  account  of  its  orbital  motion, 


FIG.  102. — Some  famous  comets. 


254 


ASTRONOMY 


and  the  plate  was  therefore  moved  from  time  to  time,  so  as 
to  follow  the  comet  and  make  its  image  always  fall  at  the 
same  place.  Hence  the  plate  was  continually  shifted  rela- 
tive to  the  stars  whose  images,  drawn  out  into  lines,  show 
the  direction  in  which  the  plate  was  moved — i.  e.,  the  direc- 
tion in  which  the  comet  was  moving  across  the  sky.  The 
same  effect  is  shown  in  the  other  photographs,  but  less 
conspicuously  than  here  on  account  of  their  shorter  expos- 
ure times. 

These  pictures  all  show  that  one  end  of  the  comet  is 
brighter  and  apparently  more  dense  than  the  other,  and  it 

is  customary  to  call 
this  bright  part  the 
head  of  the  comet, 
while  the  brushlike 
appendage  that 
streams  away  from 
it  is  called  the 
comet's  tail. 

160.  The  parts 
of  a  comet. — It  is 
not  every  comet 
that  has  a  tail, 
though  all  the 
large  ones  do,  and 
in  Fig.  103  the  de- 
tached piece  of 
cometary  matter  at 
the  left  of  the 
picture  represents 

very  well  the  appearance  of  a  tailless  comet,  a  rather  large 
but  not  very  bright  star  of  a  fuzzy  or  hairy  appearance. 
The  word  comet  means  long-haired  or  hairy  star.  Some- 
thing of  this  vagueness  of  outline  is  found  in  all  comets, 
whose  exact  boundaries  are  hard  to  define,  instead  of  being 
sharp  and  clean-cut  like  those  of  a  planet  or  satellite. 


FIG.  103.— Brooke's  comet,  November  13,  1893. 
BARNARD. 


COMETS  AND  METEORS  255 

Often,  however,  there  is  found  in  the  head  of  a  comet  a 
much  more  solid  appearing  part,  like  the  round  white  ball 
at  the  center  of  Fig.  106,  which  is  called  the  nucleus  of 


FIG.  104.— Swift's  comet,  April  17,  1892.— BAKNARD. 

the  comet,  and  appears  to  be  in  some  sort  the  center  from 
which  its  activities  radiate.  As  shown  in  Figs.  106  and 
107,  the  nucleus  is  sometimes  surrounded  by  what  are 
called  envelopes,  which  have  the  appearance  of  successive 
wrappings  or  halos  placed  about  it,  and  odd,  spurlike  pro- 
jections, called  jets,  are  sometimes  found  in  connection 
with  the  envelopes  or  in  place  of  them.  These  figures  also 
show  what  is  quite  a  common  characteristic  of  large 
comets,  a  dark  streak  running  down  the  axis  of  the  tail, 
showing  that  the  tail  is  hollow,  a  mere  shell  surrounding 
empty  space. 

The  amount  of  detail  shown  in  Figs.  106  and  107  is, 
however,  quite  exceptional,  and  the  ordinary  comet  is  much 
more  like  Fig.  103  or  104.  Even  a  great  comet  when  it 


256  ASTRONOMY 

first  appears  is  not  unlike  the  detached  fragment  in  Fig. 
103,  a  faint  and  roundish  patch  of  foggy  light  which  grows 
through  successive  stages  to  its  maximum  estate,  develop- 
ing a  tail,  nucleus,  envelopes,  etc.,  only  to  lose  them  again 
as  it  shrinks  and  finally  disappears. 

161.  The  orbits  of  comets,— It  will  be  remembered  that 
Newton  found,  as  a  theoretical  consequence  of  the  law  of 
gravitation,  that  a  body  moving  under  the  influence  of  the 
sun's  attraction  might  have  as  its  orbit  any  one  of  the 
conic  sections,  ellipse,  parabola,  or  hyperbola,  and  among 
the  400  and  more  comet  orbits  which  have  been  deter- 
mined every  one  of  these  orbit  forms  appear,  but  curiously 
enough  there  is  not  a  hyperbola  among  them  which,  if 
drawn  upon  paper,  could  be  distinguished  by  the  unaided 


FIG.  105.— Swift's  comet,  April  24,  1892.— BARNARD. 

eye  from  a  parabola,  and  the  ellipses  are  all  so  long  and 
narrow,  not  one  of  them  being  so  nearly  round  as  is  the 
most  eccentric  planet  orbit,  that  astronomers  are  accus- 
tomed to  look  upon  the  parabola  as  being  the  normal  type 


COMETS  AND  METEORS 


257 


of  comet  orbit,  and  to  regard  a  comet  whose  motion  differs 
much  from  a  parabola  as  being  abnormal  and  calling  for 
some  special  explanation. 

The  fact  that  comet  orbits  are  parabolas,  or  differ  but 
little  from  them,  explains  at  once  the  temporary  character 
and  speedy  disappearance 
of  these  bodies.  They 
are  visitors  to  the  solar 
system  and  visible  for 
only  a  short  time,  because 
the  parabola  in  which 
they  travel  is  not  a  closed 
curve,  and  the  comet,  hav- 
ing passed  once  along 
that  portion  of  it  near  the 
earth  and  the  sun,  moves 
off  along  a  path  which 
ever  thereafter  takes  it 
farther  and  farther  away, 
beyond  the  limit  of  visi- 
bility. The  development 
of  the  comet  during  the 
time  it  is  visible,  the 
growth  and  disappearance 

of  tail,  nucleus,  etc.,  depend  upon  its  changing  distance 
from  the  sun,  the  highest  development  and  most  complex 
structure  being  presented  when  it  is  nearest  to  the  sun. 

Fig.  108  shows  the  path  of  the  Great  Comet  of  1882 
during  the  period  in  which  it  was  seen,  from  September  3, 
1882,  to  May  26, 1883.  These  dates— IX,  3,  and  V,  26— are 
marked  in  the  figure  opposite  the  parts  of  the  orbit  in 
which  the  comet  stood  at  those  times.  Similarly,  the  posi- 
tions of  the  earth  in  its  orbit  at  the  beginning  of  Septem- 
ber, October,  Xovember,  etc.,  are  marked  by  the  Roman 
numerals  IX,  X,  XI,  etc.  The  line  S  V  shows  the  direction 
from  the  sun  to  the  vernal  equinox,  and  S&  is  the  line 


FIG.  106.— Head  of  Coggia's  comet, 
July  13,  1874.— BOND. 


258 


ASTRONOMY 


along  which  the  plane  of  the  comet's  orbit  intersects  the 
plane  of  the  earth's  orbit — i.  e.,  it  is  the  line  of  nodes  of  the 
comet  orbit.  Since  the  comet  approached  the  sun  from 
the  south  side  of  the  ecliptic,  all  of  its  orbit,  save  the  little 
segment  which  falls  to  the  left  of  $Q,  lies  below  (south)  of 
the  plane  of  the  earth's  orbit,  and  the  part  which  would 
be  hidden  if  this  plane  were  opaque  is  represented  by  a 
broken  line. 

162.  Elements  of  a  comet's  orbit,— There  is  a  theorem  of 
geometry  to  the  effect  that  through  any  three  points  not 
in  the  same  straight  line  one  circle,  and  only  one,  can  be 
drawn.  Corresponding  to  this  there  is  a  theorem  of  celes- 
tial mechanics,  that  through  any  three  positions  of  a  comet 

one  conic  section,  and 
only  one,  can  be  passed 
along  which  the  comet 
can  move  in  accordance 
with  the  law  of  gravita- 
tion. This  conic  section 
is,  of  course,  its  orbit,  and 
at  the  discovery  of  a  com- 
et astronomers  always 
hasten  to  observe  its  po- 
sition in  the  sky  on  dif- 
ferent nights  in  order  to 
obtain  the  three  positions 
(right  ascensions  and  de- 
clinations) necessary  for 
determining  the  particu- 
lar orbit  in  which  it 
moves.  The  circle,  to 
which  reference  was  made 
above,  is  completely  as- 
certained and  defined  when  we  know  its  radius  and  the 
position  of  its  center.  A  parabola  is  not  so  simply  defined, 
and  five  numbers,  called  the  elements  of  its  orbit,  are 


FIG.  107.— Head  of  Donati's  comet,  Septem- 
ber 30,  October  2,  1858.— BOND. 


COMETS  AND  METEORS 


259 


required  to  fix  accurately  a  comet's  path  around  the  sun. 
Two  of  these  relate  to  the  position  of  the  line  of  nodes  and 
the  angle  which  the  orbit  plane  makes  with  the  plane  of  the 
ecliptic  ;  a  third  fixes  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  the  orbit 


FIG.  108.— Orbits  of  the  earth  and  the 
Great  Comet  of  1882. 


in  its  plane,  and  the  remaining  two,  which  are  of  more 
interest  to  us,  are  the  date  at  which  the  comet  makes  its 
nearest  approach  to  the  sun  (perihelion  passage)  and  its 
distance  from  the  sun  at  that  date  (perihelion  distance). 
The  date,  September  17th,  placed  near  the  center  of  Fig. 
108,  is  the  former  of  these  elements,  while  the  latter,  which 
is  too  small  to  be  accurately  measured  here,  may  be  found 
from  Fig.  109  to  be  0.82  of  the  sun's  diameter,  or,  in  terms 
of  the  earth's  distance  from  the  sun,  C.008. 

Fig.  109  shows  on  a  large  scale  the  shape  of  that  part  of 
the  orbit  near  the  sun  and  gives  the  successive  positions  of 
the  comet,  at  intervals  of  T2¥  of  a  day,  on  September  16th 
and  17th,  showing  that  in  less  than  10  hours — 17.0  to  17.4 
— the  comet  swung  around  the  sun  through  an  angle  of 


260 


ASTRONOMY 


more  than  240°.  When  at  its  perihelion  it  was  moving 
with  a  velocity  of  300  miles  per  second  !  This  very  unusual 
velocity  was  due  to  the  comet's  extraordinarily  close  ap- 
proach to  the  sun.  The  earth's  velocity  in  its  orbit  is  only 
19  miles  per  second,  and  the  velocity  of  any  comet  at  any 
distance  from  the  sun,  provided  its  orbit  is  a  parabola,  may 
be  found  by  dividing  this  number  by  the  square  root  of 
half  the  comet's  distance — e.  g.,  300  miles  per  second  equals 
19-^0.004. 

Most  of  the  visible  comets  have  their  perihelion  dis- 
tances included  between  ^  and  f  of  the  earth's  distance 
from  the  sun,  but  occasionally  one  is  found,  like  the 
second  comet  of  1885,  whose  nearest  approach  to  the  sun 


FIG.  109.— Motion  of  the  Great  Comet  of  1882  in  passing  around  the  sun. 

lies  far  outside  the  earth's  orbit,  in  this  case  half-way 
out  to  the  orbit  of  Jupiter;  but  such  a  comet  must  be  a 
very  large  one  in  order  to  be  seen  at  all  from  the  earth. 


COMETS  AND  METEORS 


261 


FIG.  110.— The  Great  Comet  of  1843. 

There  is,  however,  some  reason  for  believing  that  the  num- 
ber of  comets  which  move  around  the  sun  without  ever 
coming  inside  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  or  even  that  of  Saturn, 
is  much  larger  than  the  number  of  those  which  come  close 
enough  to  be  discovered  from  the  earth.  In  any  case  we 
are  reminded  of  Kepler's  saying,  that  comets  in  the  sky  are 
as  plentiful  as  fishes  in  the  sea,  which  seems  to  be  very  little 
exaggerated  when  we  consider  that,  according  to  Kleiber, 
out  of  all  the  comets  which  enter  the  solar  system  probably 
not  more  than  2  or  3  per  cent  are  ever  discovered. 

163.  Dimensions  of  comets, — The  comet  whose  orbit  is 
shown  in  Figs.  108  and  109  is  the  finest  and  largest  that 
has  appeared  in  recent  years.  Its  tail,  which  at  its  maxi- 
mum extent  would  have  more  than  bridged  the  space  be- 
tween sun  and  earth  (100,000,000  miles),  is  made  very  much 
too  short  in  Fig.  109,  but  when  at  its  best  was  probably  not 
inferior  to  that  of  the  Great  Comet  in  1843,  shown  in  Fig. 


262  ASTRONOMY 

110.  As  we  shall  see  later,  there  is  a  peculiar  and  special 
relationship  between  these  two  comets. 

The  head  of  the  comet  of  1882  was  not  especially  large 
— about  twice  the  diameter  of  the  ball  of  Saturn — but  its 
nucleus,  according  to  an  estimate  made  by  Dr.  Elkin  when 
it  was  very  near  perihelion,  was  as  large  as  the  moon.  The 
head  of  the  comet  shown  in  Fig.  107  was  too  large  to  be 
put  in  the  space  between  the  earth  and  the  moon,  and  the 
Great  Comet  of  1811  had  a  head  considerably  larger  than 
the  sun  itself.  From  these  colossal  sizes  down  to  the 
smallest  shred  just  visible  in  the  telescope,  comets  of  all 
dimensions  may  be  found,  but  the  smaller  the  comet  the 
less  the  chance  of  its  being  discovered,  and  a  comet  as  small 
as  the  earth  would  probably  go  unobserved  unless  it  ap- 
proached very  close  to  us. 

164.  The  mass  of  a  comet, — There  is  no  known  case  in 
which  the  mass  of  a  comet  has  ever  been  measured,  yet 
nothing  about  them  is  more  sure  than  that  they  are  bodies 
with  mass  which  is  attracted  by  the  sun  and  the  planets, 
and  which  in  its  turn  attracts  both  sun  and  planets  and 
produces  perturbations  in  their  motion.  These  perturba- 
tions are,  however,  too  small  to  be  measured,  although  the 
corresponding  perturbations  in  the  comet's  motion  are 
sometimes  enormous,  and  since  these  mutual  perturbations 
are  proportional  to  the  masses  of  comet  and  planet,  we  are 
forced  to  say  that,  by  comparison  with  even  such  small 
bodies  as  the  moon  or  Mercury,  the  mass  of  a  comet  is 
utterly  insignificant,  certainly  not  as  great  as  a  ten-thou- 
'"salrdth  part  of  the  mass  of  the  earth.  In  the  case  of  the 
Great  Comet  of  1882,  if  we  leave  its  hundred  million  miles 
of  tail  out^pf  account  and  suppose  the  entire  mass  condensed 
into  its  head,  we  find  by  a  little  computation  that  the  aver- 
age density  of^  the  head  under  these  circumstances  must 
have  been  less\  than  T^Vo-  Part  of  tne  density  of  air.  In 
ordinary  laboratory  practice  this  would  be  called  a  pretty 
good  vacuum. 


COMETS  AND  METEORS  263 

A  striking  observation  made  on  September  17,  1882, 
goes  to  confirm  the  very  small  density  of  this  comet.  It 
is  shown  in  Fig.  109  that  early  on  that  day  the  comet 
crossed  the  line  joining  earth  and  sun,  and  therefore  passed 
in  transit  over  the  sun's  disk.  Two  observers  at  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope  saw  the  comet  approach  the  sun,  and  fol- 
lowed it  with  their  telescopes  until  the  nucleus  actually 
reached  the  edge  of  the  sun  and  disappeared,  behind  it  as 
they  supposed,  for  no  trace  of  the  comet,  not  even  its 
nucleus,  could  be  seen  against  the  sun,  although  it  was  care- 
fully looked  for.  Now,  the  figure  shows  that  the  comet 
passed  between  the  earth  and  sun,  and  its  densest  parts 
were  therefore  too  attenuated  to  cut  off  any  perceptible 
fraction  of  the  sun's  rays.  In  other  cases  stars  have  been 
seen  through  the  head  of  a  comet,  shining  apparently  with 
undimmed  luster,  although  in  some  cases  they  seem  to 
have  been  slightly  refracted  out  of  their  true  positions. 

165.  Meteors. — Before  proceeding  further  with  the  study 
of  comets  it  is  well  to  turn  aside  and  consider  their  hum- 
bler relatives,  the  shooting  stars.  On  some  clear  evening, 
when  the  moon  is  absent  from  the  sky,  watch  the  heavens 
for  an  hour  and  count  the  meteors  visible  during  that  time. 
Note  their  paths,  the  part  of  the  sky  where  they  appear 
and  where  they  disappear,  their  brightness,  and  whether 
they  all  move  with  equal  swiftness.  Out  of  such  simple 
observations  with  the  unaided  eye  there  has  grown  a  large 
and  important  branch  of  astronomical  science,  some  parts 
of  which  we  shall  briefly  summarize  here. 

A  particular  meteor  is  a  local  phenomenon  seen  over 
only  a  small  part  of  the  earth's  surface,  although  occasion- 
ally a  very  big  and  bright  one  may  travel  and  be  visible 
over  a  considerable  territory.  Such  a  one  in  December, 
1876,  swept  over  the  United  States  from  Kansas  to  Penn- 
sylvania, and  was  seen  from  eleven  different  States.  But  the 
ordinary  shooting  star  is  much  less  conspicuous,  and,  as  we 
know  from  simultaneous  observations  made  at  neighboring 


264:  ASTRONOMY 

places,  it  makes  its  appearance  at  a  height  of  some  75  miles 
above  the  earth's  surface,  occupies  something  like  a  second 
in  moving  over  its  path,  and  then  disappears  at  a  height 
of  ahout  50  miles  or  more,  although  occasionally  a  big  one 
comes  down  to  the  very  surface  of  the  earth  with  force 
sufficient  to  bury  itself  in  the  ground,  from  which  it  may 
be  dug  up,  handled,  weighed,  and  turned  over  to  the  chem- 
ist to  be  analyzed.  The  pieces  thus  found  show  that  the 
big  meteors,  at  least,  are  masses  of  stone  or  mineral ;  iron 
is  quite  commonly  found  in  them,  as  are  a  considerable 
number  of  other  terrestrial  substances  combined  in  rather 
peculiar  ways.  But  no  chemical  element  not  found  on  the 
earth  has  ever  been  discovered  in  a  meteor. 

166.  Nature  of  meteors. — The  swiftness  with  which  the 
meteors  sweep  down  shows  that  they  must  come  from  out- 
side the  earth,  for  even  half  their  velocity,  if  given  to  them 
by  some  terrestrial  volcano  or  other  explosive  agent,  would 
send  them  completely  away  from  the  earth  never  to  return. 
We  must  therefore  look  upon  them  as  so  many  projectiles, 
bullets,  fired  against  the  earth  from  some  outside  source 
and  arrested  in  their  motion  by  the  earth's  atmosphere, 
which  serves  as  a  cushion  to  protect  the  ground  from  the 
bombardment  which  would  otherwise  prove  in  the  highest 
degree  dangerous  to  both  property  and  life.  The  speed  of 
the  meteor  is  checked  by  the  resistance  which  the  atmos- 
phere offers  to  its  motion,  and  the  energy  represented  by 
that  speed  is  transformed  into  heat,  which  in  less  than  a 
second  raises  the  meteor  and  the  surrounding  air  to  incan- 
descence, melts  the  meteor  either  wholly  or  in  part,  and 
usually  destroys  its  identity,  leaving  only  an  impalpable 
dust,  which  cools  off  as  it  settles  slowly  through  the  lower 
atmosphere  to  the  ground.  The  heating  effect  of  the  air's 
resistance  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  meteor's 
velocity,  and  even  at  such  a  moderate  speed  as  1  mile  per 
second  the  effect  upon  the  meteor  is  the  same  as  if  it  stood 
still  in  a  bath  of  red-hot  air.  Now,  the  actual  velocity  of 


COMETS  AND  METEORS  265 

meteors  through  the  air  is  often  30  or  40  times  as  great  as 
this,  and  the  corresponding  effect  of  the  air  in  raising  its 
temperature  is  more  than  1,000  times  that  of  red  heat. 
Small  wonder  that  the  meteor  is  brought  to  lively  incan- 
descence and  consumed  even  in  a  fraction  of  a  second. 

167.  The  number  of  meteors. — A  single  observer  may 
expect  to  see  in  the  evening  hours  about  one  meteor  every 
10  minutes  on  the  average,  although,  of  course,  in  this 
respect  much  irregularity  may  occur.  Later  in  the  night 
they  become  more  frequent,  and  after  2  A.  M.  there  are 
about  three  times  as  many  to  be  seen  as  in  the  evening 
hours.  But  no  one  person  can  keep  a  watch  upon  the 
whole  sky,  high  and  low,  in  front  and  behind,  and  experi- 
ence shows  that  by  increasing  the  number  of  observers  and 
assigning  to  each  a  particular  part  of  the  sky,  the  total 
number  of  meteors  counted  may  be  increased  about  five- 
fold. So,  too,  the  observers  at  any  one  place  can  keep  an 
effective  watch  upon  only  those  meteors  which  come  into  the 
earth's  atmosphere  within  some  moderate  distance  of  their 
station,  say  50  or  100  miles,  and  to  watch  every  part  of  that 
atmosphere  would  require  a  large  number  of  stations,  esti- 
mated at  something  more  than  10,000,  scattered  systemat- 
ically over  the  whole  face  of  the  earth.  If  we  piece  to- 
gether the  several  numbers  above  considered,  taking  14  as 
a  fair  average  of  the  hourly  number  of  meteors  to  be  seen 
by  a  single  observer  at  all  hours  of  the  night,  we  shall  find 
for  the  total  number  of  meteors  encountered  by  the  earth 
in  24  hours,  14  X  5  X  10,000  x  24  =  16,800,000.  Without 
laying  too  much  stress  upon  this  particular  number,  we 
may  fairly  say  that  the  meteors  picked  up  by  the  earth 
every  day  are  to  be  reckoned  by  millions,  and  since  they 
come  at  all  seasons  of  the  year,  we  shall  have  to  admit  that 
the  region  through  which  the  earth  moves,  instead  of  being 
empty  space,  is  really  a  dust  cloud,  each  individual  particle 
of  dust  being  a  prospective  meteor. 

On  the  average  these  individual  particles  are  very  small 
18 


266  ASTRONOMY 

and  very  far  apart ;  a  cloud  of  silver  dimes  each  about  250 
miles  from  its  nearest  neighbor  is  perhaps  a  fair  representa- 
tion of  their  average  mass  and  distance  from  each  other, 
but,  of  course,  great  variations  are  to  be  expected  both  in  the 
size  and  in  the  frequency  of  the  particles.  There  must  be 
great  numbers  of  them  that  are  too  small  to  make  shooting 
stars  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  and  such  are  occasionally 
seen  darting  by  chance  across  the  field  of  view  of  a  tele- 
scope. 

168.  The  zodiacal  light  is  an  effect  probably  due  to  the 
reflection  of  sunlight  from  the  myriads  of  these  tiny  meteors 
which  occupy  the  space  inside  the  earth's  orbit.     It  is  a 
faint  and  diffuse  stream  of  light,  something  like  the  Milky 
Way,  which  may  be  seen  in  the  early  evening  or  morning 
stretching  up  from  the  sunrise   or   sunset   point   of  the 
horizon  along  the  ecliptic  and   following   its   course   for 
many  degrees,  possibly  around  the  entire  circumference  of 
the  sky.     It  may  be  seen  at  any  season  of  the  year,  although 
it  shows  to  the  best  advantage  in  spring   evenings   and 
autumn  mornings.     Look  for  it. 

169.  Great  meteors. — But  there  are  other  meteors,  veri- 
table fireballs  in  appearance,  far  more  conspicuous  and  im- 
posing than  the  ordinary  shooting  star.     Such  a  one  ex- 
ploded over  the  city  of  Madrid,  Spain,  on  the  morning  of 
February  10,  1896,  giving  in  broad  sunlight  "  a  brilliant 
flash  which  was  followed  ninety  seconds  later  by  a  succes- 
sion of  terrific  noises  like  the  discharge  of  a  battery  of 
artillery."    Fig.  110  shows  a  large  meteor  which  was  seen 
in  California  in  the  early  evening  of  July  27,  1894,  and 
which  left  behind  it  a  luminous  trail  or  cloud  visible  for 
more  than  half  an  hour. 

Not  infrequently  large  meteors  are  found  traveling 
together,  two  or  three  or  more  in  company,  making  their 
appearance  simultaneously  as  did  the  California  meteor  of 
October  22,  1896,  which  is  described  as  triple,  the  trio  fol- 
lowing one  another  like  a  train  of  cars,  and  Arago  cites  an 


COMETS  AND  METEORS 


26T 


instance,  from  the  year  1830,  where  within  a  short  space  of 
time  some  forty  brilliant  meteors  crossed  the  sky,  all  mov- 
ing in  the  same  direction  with  a  whistling  noise  and  dis- 
playing in  their  flight  all  the  colors  of  the  rainbow. 

The  mass  of  great  meteors  such  as  these  must  be  meas- 
ured in  hundreds  if  not  thousands  of  pounds,  and  stories 
are  current,  although  not 
very  well  authenticated,  of 
even  larger  ones,  many  tons 
in  weight,  having  been  found 
partially  buried  in  the  ground. 
Of  meteors  which  have  been 
actually  seen  to  fall  from  the 
sky,  the  largest  single  frag- 
ment recovered  weighs  about 
500  pounds,  but  it  is  only  a 
fragment  of  the  original  me- 
teor, which  must  have  been 
much  more  massive  before  it 
was  broken  up  by  collision 
with  the  atmosphere. 

170.  The  velocity  of  me- 
teors.— Every  meteor,  big  or 
little,  is  subject  to  the  law  of 
gravitation,  and  before  it  en- 
counters the  earth  must  be 
moving  in  some  kind  of  orbit 
having  the  sun  at  its  focus, 
the  particular  species  of  orbit — ellipse,  parabola,  hyperbola 
— depending  upon  the  velocity  and  direction  of  its  motion. 
Xow,  the  direction  in  which  a  meteor  is  moving  can  be 
determined  without  serious  difficulty  from  observations  of 
its  apparent  path  across  the  sky  made  by  two  or  more  ob- 
servers, but  the  velocity  can  not  be  so  readily  found,  since 
the  meteors  go  too  fast  for  any  ordinary  process  of  timing. 
But  by  photographing  one  of  them  two  or  three  times  on 


FIG.  111.— The  California  meteor  of 
July  27, 1894. 


268  ASTRONOMY 

the  same  plate,  with  an  interval  of  only  a  tenth  of  a  second 
between  exposures,  Dr.  Elkin  has  succeeded  in  showing,  in 
a  few  cases,  that  their  velocities  varied  from  20  to  25  miles 
per  second,  and  must  have  been  considerably  greater  than 
this  before  the  meteors  encountered  the  earth's  atmosphere. 
This  is  a  greater  velocity  than  that  of  the  earth  in  its  orbit, 
19  miles  per  second,  as  might  have  been  anticipated,  since 
the  mere  fact  that  meteors  can  be  seen  at  all  in  the  evening 
hours  shows  that  some  of  them  at  least  must  travel  consid- 
erably faster  than  the  earth,  for,  counting  in  the  direction 
of  the  earth's  motion,  the  region  of  sunset  and  evening  is 
always  on  the  rear  side  of  the  earth,  and  meteors  in  order 
to  strike  this  region  must  overtake  it  by  their  swifter 
motion.  We  have  here,  in  fact,  the  reason  why  meteors 
are  especially  abundant  in  the  morning  hours ;  at  this  time 
the  observer  is  on  the  front  side  of  the  earth  which  catches 
swift  and  slow  meteors  alike,  while  the  rear  is  pelted  only 
by  the  swifter  ones  which  follow  it. 

A  comparison  of  the  relative  number  of  morning  and 
evening  meteors  makes  it  probable  that  the  average  meteor 
moves,  relative  to  the  sun,  with  a  velocity  of  about  26  miles 
per  second,  which  is  very  approximately  the  average  velocity 
of  comets  when  they  are  at  the  earth's  distance  from  the 
sun.  Astronomers,  therefore,  consider  meteors  as  well  as 
comets  to  have  the  parabola  and  the  elongated  ellipse  as 
their  characteristic  orbits. 

171.  Meteor  showers— The  radiant. — There  is  evident 
among  meteors  a  distinct  tendency  for  individuals,  to  the 
number  of  hundreds  or  even  hundreds  of  millions,  to 
travel  together  in  flocks  or  swarms,  all  going  the  same  way 
in  orbits  almost  exactly  alike.  This  gregarious  tendency  is 
made  manifest  not  only  by  the  fact  that  from  time  to  time 
there  are  unusually  abundant  meteoric  displays,  but  also 
by  a  striking  peculiarity  of  their  behavior  at  such  times. 
The  meteors  all  seem  to  come  from  a  particular  part  of  the 
heavens,  as  if  here  were  a  hole  in  the  sky  through  which 


COMETS  AND  METEORS  269 

they  were  introduced,  and  from  which  they  flow  away  in 
every  direction,  even  those  which  do  not  visibly  start  from 
this  place  having  paths  among  the  stars  which,  if  prolong- 
ing backward,  would  pass  through  it.  The  cause  of  this 
appearance  may  be  understood  from  Fig.  112,  which  repre-^ 


FIG.  112. — Explanation  of  the  radiant  of  a  meteoric  shower. — DENNING. 

sents  a  group  of  meteors  moving  together  along  parallel 
paths  toward  an  observer  at  D.  Traveling  unseen  above 
the  earth  until  they  encounter  the  upper  strata  of  its  at- 
mosphere, they  here  become  incandescent  and  speed  on  in 
parallel  paths,  -?,  #,  3,  ^,  5,  0,  which,  as  seen  by  the  observer, 
are  projected  back  against  the  sky  into  luminous  streaks 
that,  as  is  shown  by  the  arrowheads,  #,  c,  d,  all  seem  to 
radiate  from  the  point  a — i.  e.,  from  the  point  in  the  sky 
whose  direction  from  the  observer  is  parallel  to  the  paths 
of  the  meteors. 

Such  a  display  is  called  a  meteor  shower,  and  the  point 
a  is  called  its  radiant.  Note  how  those  meteors  which 
appear  near  the  radiant  all  have  short  paths,  while  those 
remote  from  it  in  the  sky  have  longer  ones.  Query  :  As 
the  night  wears  on  and  the  stars  shift  toward  the  west,  will 


270 


ASTKONOMY 


the  radiant  share  in  their  motion  or  will  it  be  left  behind  ? 
Would  the  luminous  part  of  the  path  of  any  of  these  me- 
teors pass  across  the  radiant  from  one  side  to  the  other  ? 
Is  such  a  crossing  of  the  radiant  possible  under  any  circum- 
stances ?  Fig.  113  shows  how  the  meteor  paths  are  grouped 
around  the  radiant  of  a  strongly  marked  shower.  Select 
from  it  the  meteors  which  do  not  belong  to  this  shower. 


FIG.  113. — The  radiant  of  a  meteoric  shower,  showing  also  the  paths  of  three  meteors 
which  do  not  belong  to  this  shower.— DENNING. 

Many  hundreds  of  these  radiants  have  been  observed  in 
the  sky,  each  of  which  represents  an  orbit  along  which  a 
group  of  meteors  moves,  and  the  relation  of  one  of  these 


COMETS  AND  METEOBS  271 

orbits  to  that  of  the  earth  is  shown  in  Fig.  114.  The  orbit 
of  the  meteors  is  an  ellipse  extending  out  beyond  the  orbit 
of  Uranus,  but  so  eccentric  that  a  part  of  it  comes  inside 
the  orbit  of  the  earth,  and  the  figure  shows  only  that  part 
of  it  which  lies  nearest  the  sun.  The  Eoman  numerals 


Fia.  114.— The  orbits  of  the  earth  and  the  November  meteors. 

which  are  placed  along  the  earth's  orbit  show  the  position 
of  the  earth  at  the  beginning  of  the  tenth  month,  eleventh 
month,  etc.  The  meteors  flow  along  their  orbit  in  a  long 
procession,  whose  direction  of  motion  is  indicated  by  the 
arrow  heads,  and  the  earth,  coming  in  the  opposite  direc- 
tion, plunges  into  this  stream  and  receives  the  meteor 
shower  when  it  reaches  the  intersection  of  the  two  orbits. 
The  long  arrow  at  the  left  of  the  figure  represents  the 
direction  of  motion  of  another  meteor  shower  which 
encounters  the  earth  at  this  point. 

Can  you  determine  from  the  figure  answers  to  the  fol- 
lowing questions  ?  On  what  day  of  the  year  will  the  earth 
meet  each  of  these  showers?  Will  the  radiant  points  of 
the  showers  lie  above  or  below  the  plane  of  the  earth's 


272  ASTRONOMY 

orbit  ?  Will  these  meteors  strike  the  front  or  the  rear  of 
the  earth  ?  Can  they  be  seen  in  the  evening  hours  ? 

From  many  of  the  radiants  year  after  year,  upon  the 
same  day  or  week  in  each  year,  there  comes  a  swarm  of 
shooting  stars,  showing  that  there  must  be  a  continuous 
procession  of  meteors  moving  along  this  orbit,  so  that  some 
are  always  ready  to  strike  the  earth  whenever  it  reaches 
the  intersection  of  its  orbit  with  theirs.  Such  is  the  expla- 
nation of  the  shower  which  appears  each  year  in  the  first 
half  of  August,  and  whose  meteors  are  sometimes  called 
Perseids,  because  their  radiant  lies  in  the  constellation 
Perseus,  and  a  similar  explanation  holds  for  all  the  star 
showers  which  are  repeated  year  after  year. 

172.  The  Leonids. — There  is,  however,  a  kind  of  star 
shower,  of  which  the  Leonids  (radiant  in  Leo)  is  the  most 
conspicuous  type,  in  which  the  shower,  although  repeated 
from  year  to  year,  is  much  more  striking  in  some  years 
than  in  others.  Thus,  to  quote  from  the  historian  :  "  In 
1833  the  shower  was  well  observed  along  the  whole  eastern 
coast  of  North  America  from  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  to  Hali- 
fax. The  meteors  were  most  numerous  at  about  5  A.  M.  on 
November  13th,  and  the  rising  sun  could  not  blot  out  all 
traces  of  the  phenomena,  for  large  meteors  were  seen  now  and 
then  in  full  daylight.  Within  the  scope  that  the  eye  could 
contain,  more  than  twenty  could  be  seen  at  a  time  shooting 
in  every  direction.  Not  a  cloud  obscured  the  broad  expanse, 
and  millions  of  meteors  sped  their  way  across  in  every 
point  of  the  compass.  Their  coruscations  were  bright, 
gleaming,  and  incessant,  and  they  fell  thick  as  the  flakes  in 
the  early  snows  of  December."  But,  so  far  as  is  known,  none 
of  them  reached  the  ground.  An  illiterate  man  on  the  fol- 
lowing day  remarked  :  "  The  stars  continued  to  fall  until 
none  were  left.  I  am  anxious  to  see  how  the  heavens  will 
appear  this  evening,  for  I  believe  we  shall  see  no  more  stars." 

An  eyewitness  in  the  Southern  States  thus  describes 
the  effect  of  this  shower  upon  the  plantation  negroes  : 


COMETS  AND  METEORS  2Y3 

"  Upward  of  a  hundred  lay  prostrate  upon  the  ground, 
some  speechless  and  some  with  the  bitterest  cries,  but  with 
their  hands  upraised,  imploring  God  to  save  the  world  and 
them.  The  scene  was  truly  awful,  for  never  did  rain  fall 
much  thicker  than  the  meteors  fell  toward  the  earth — east, 
west,  north,  and  south  it  was  the  same."  In  the  preceding 
year  a  similar  but  feebler  shower  from  the  same  radiant 
created  much  alarm  in  France,  and  through  the  old  historic 
records  its  repetitions  may  be  traced  back  at  intervals  of  33 
or  34  years,  although  with  many  interruptions,  to  October 
12,  902,  0.  S.,  when  "  an  immense  number  of  falling  stars 
were  seen  to  spread  themselves  over  the  face  of  the  sky 
like  rain." 

Such  a  star  shower  differs  from  the  one  repeated  every 
year  chiefly  in  the  fact  that  its  meteors,  instead  of  being 
drawn  out  into  a  long  procession,  are  mainly  clustered  in  a 
single  flock  which  may  be  long  enough  to  require  two  or 
three  or  four  years  to  pass  a  given  point  of  its  orbit,  but 
which  is  far  from  extending  entirely  around  it,  so  that  me- 
teors from  this  source  are  abundant  only  in  those  years  in 
which  the  flock  is  at  or  near  the  intersection  of  its  orbit 
with  that  of  the  earth.  The  fact  that  the  Leonid  shower  is 
repeated  at  intervals  of  33  or  34  years  (it  appeared  in  1799, 
1832-'33,  1866-'67)  shows  that  this  is  the  "  periodic  time  " 
in  its  orbit,  which  latter  must  of  course  be  an  ellipse,  and 
presumably  a  long  and  narrow  one.  It  is  this  orbit  which 
is  shown  in  Fig.  114,  and  the  student  should  note  in  this 
figure  that  if  the  meteor  stream  at  the  point  where  it  cuts 
through  the  plane  of  the  earth's  orbit  were  either  nearer  to 
or  farther  from  the  sun  than  is  the  earth  there  could  be  no 
shower ;  the  earth  and  the  meteors  would  pass  by  without  a 
collision.  Now,  the  meteors  in  their  motion  are  subject  to 
perturbations,  particularly  by  the  large  planets  Jupiter, 
Saturn,  and  Uranus,  which  slightly  change  the  meteor  orbit, 
and  it  seems  certain  that  the  changes  thus  produced  will 
sometimes  thrust  the  swarm  inside  or  outside  the  orbit  of 


274  ASTRONOMY 

the  earth,  and  thus  cause  a  failure  of  the  shower  at  times 
when  it  is  expected.  The  meteors  were  due  at  the  crossing 
of  the  orbits  in  November,  1899  and  1900,  and,  although  a 
few  were  then  seen,  the  shower  was  far  from  being  a  bril- 
liant one,  and  its  failure  was  doubtless  caused  by  the  outer 
planets,  which  switched  the  meteors  aside  from  the  path  in 
which  they  had  been  moving  for  a  century.  Whether  they 
will  be  again  switched  back  so  as  to  produce  future  showers 
is  at  the  present  time  uncertain. 

173.  Capture  of  the  Leonids.— But  a  far  more  striking 
effect  of  perturbations  is  to  be  found  in  Fig.  115,  which 
shows  the  relation  of  the  Leonid  orbit  to  those  of  the  prin- 
cipal planets,  and  illustrates  a  curious  chapter  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  meteor  swarm  that  has  been  worked  out  by 
mathematical  analysis,  and  is  probably  a  pretty  good  ac- 
count of  what  actually  befell  them.  Early  in  the  second 
century  of  the  Christian  era  this  flock  of  meteors  came 
down  toward  the  sun  from  outer  space,  moving  along  a 
parabolic  orbit  which  would  have  carried  it  just  inside  the 
orbit  of  Jupiter,  and  then  have  sent  it  off  to  return  no 
more.  But  such  was  not  to  be  its  fate.  As  it  approached 
the  orbit  of  Uranus,  in  the  year  126  A.  D.,  that  planet 
chanced  to  be  very  near  at  hand  and  perturbed  the  motion 
of  the  meteors  to  such  an  extent  that  the  character  of  their 
orbit  was  completely  changed  into  the  ellipse  shown  in  the 
figure,  and  in  this  new  orbit  they  have  moved  from  that 
time  to  this,  permanent  instead  of  transient  members  of 
the  solar  system.  The  perturbations,  however,  did  not  end 
with  the  year  in  which  the  meteors  were  captured  and  an- 
nexed to  the  solar  system,  but  ever  since  that  time  Jupiter, 
Saturn,  and  Uranus  have  been  pulling  together  upon  the 
orbit,  and  have  gradually  turned  it  around  into  its  present 
position  as  shown  in  the  figure,  and  it  is  chiefly  this  shift- 
ing of  the  orbit's  position  in  the  thousand  years  that  have 
elapsed  since  902  A.  D.  that  makes  the  meteor  shower  now 
come  in  November  instead  of  in  October  as  it  did  then. 


276  ASTRONOMY 

174.  Breaking  up  a  meteor  swarm,— How  closely  packed 
together  these  meteors  were  at  the  time  of  their  annexation 
to  the  solar  system  is  unknown,  but  it  is  certain  that  ever 
since  that  time  the  sun  has  been  exerting  upon  them  a 
tidal  influence  tending  to  break  up  the  swarm  and  distribute 
its  particles  around  the  orbit,  as  the  Perseids  are  distrib- 
uted, and,  given  sufficient  time,  it  will  accomplish  this,  but 
up  to  the  present  the  work  is  only  partly  done.     A  certain 
number  of  the  meteors  have  gained  so  much  over  the  slower 
moving  ones  as  to  have  made  an  extra  circuit  of  the  orbit 
and  overtaken  the  rear  of  the  procession,  so  that  there  is  a 
thin  stream  of  them  extending  entirely  around  the  orbit 
and  furnishing  in  every  November  a  Leonid  shower;  but  by 
far  the  larger  part  of  the  meteors  still  cling  together,  al- 
though drawn  out  into  a  stream  or  ribbon,  which,  though 
very  thin,  is  so  long  that  it  takes  some  three  years  to  pass 
through  the  perihelion  of  its  orbit.     It  is  only  when  the 
earth  plunges  through  this  ribbon,  as  it  should  in  1899, 
1900,  1901,  that  brilliant  Leonid  showers  can  be  expected. 

175.  Relation  of  comets  and  meteors. — It  appears  from 
the  foregoing  that  meteors  and  comets  move  in  similar  or- 
bits, and  we  have  now  to  push  the  analogy  a  little  further 
and  note  that  in  some,  instances  at  least  they  move  in  iden- 
tically the  same  orbit,  or  at  least  in  orbits  so  like  that  an 
appreciable  difference  between  them  is  hardly  to  be  found. 
Thus  a  comet  which  was  discovered  and  observed  early  in 
the  year  1866,  moves  in  the  same  orbit  with  the  Leonid 
meteors,  passing  its  perihelion  about  ten  months  ahead  of 
the  main  body  of  the  meteors.     If  it  were  set  back  in  its 
orbit  by  ten  months'  motion,  it  would  be  a  part  of  the  meteor 
swarm.    Similarly,  the  Perseid  meteors  have  a  comet  moving 
in  their  orbit  actually  immersed   in  the  stream  of  meteor 
particles,  and  several  other  of  the  more  conspicuous  star 
showers  have  comets  attending  them. 

Perhaps  the  most  remarkable  case  of  this  character  is 
that  of  a  shower  which  comes  in  the  latter  part  of  Govern- 


COMETS  AND  METEORS  27Y 

ber  from  the  constellation  Andromeda,  and  which  from  its 
association  with  the  comet  called  Biela  (after  the  name  of 
its  discoverer)  is  frequently  referred  to  as  the  Bielid  shower. 
This  comet,  an  inconspicuous  one  moving  in  an  unusually 
small  elliptical  orbit,  had  been  observed  at  various  times 
from  1772  down  to  1846  without  presenting  anything  re- 
markable in  its  appearance;  but  about  the  beginning  of  the 
latter  year,  with  very  little  warning,  it  broke  in  two,  and 
for  three  months  the  pieces  were  watched  by  astronomers 
moving  off,  side  by  side,  something  more  than  half  as  far 
apart  as  are  the  earth  and  moon.  It  disappeared,  made  the 
circuit  of  its  orbit,  and  six  years  later  came  back,  with  the 
fragments  nearly  ten  times  as  far  apart  as  before,  and  after 
a  short  stay  near  the  earth  once  more  disappeared  in  the  dis- 
tance, never  to  be  seen  again,  although  the  fragments  should 
have  returned  to  perihelion  at  least  half  a  dozen  times  since 
then.  In  one  respect  the  orbit  of  the  comet  was  remark- 
able :  it  passed  through  the  place  in  which  the  earth  stands 
on  November  27th  of  each  year,  so  that  if  the  comet  were  at 
that  particular  part  of  its  orbit  on  any  November  27th,  a 
collision  between  it  and  the  earth  would  be  inevitable.  So 
far  as  is  known,  no  such  collision  with  the  comet  has  ever 
occurred,  but  the  Bielid  meteors  which  are  strung  along 
its  orbit  do  encounter  the  earth  on  that  date,  in  greater  or 
less  abundance  in  different  years,  and  are  watched  with 
much  interest  by  the  astronomers  who  look  upon  them  as 
the  final  appearance  of  the  debris  of  a  worn-out  comet. 

176.  Periodic  comets, — The  Biela  comet  is  a  specimen  of 
the  type  which  astronomers  call  periodic  comets — i.  e., 
those  which  move  in  small  ellipses  and  have  correspond- 
ingly short  periodic  times,  so  that  they  return  frequently 
and  regularly  to  perihelion.  The  comets  which  accompany 
the  other  meteor  swarms — Leonids,  Perseids,  etc. — also  be- 
long to  this  class  as  do  some  30  or  40  others  which  have 
periodic  times  less  than  a  century.  As  has  been  already 
indicated,  these  deviations  from  the  normal  parabolic  orbit 


2Y8  ASTRONOMY 

call  for  some  special  explanation,  and  the  substance  of  that 
explanation  is  contained  in  the  account  of  the  Leonid 
meteors  and  their  capture  by  Uranus.  Any  comet  may  be 
thus  captured  by  the  attraction  of  a  planet  near  which  it 
passes.  It  is  only  necessary  that  the  perturbing  action 
of  the  planet  should  result  in  a  diminution  of  the  comet's 
velocity,  for  we  have  already  learned  that  it  is  this  velocity 
which  determines  the  character  of  the  orbit,  and  anything 
less  than  the  velocity  appropriate  to  a  parabola  must  pro- 
duce an  ellipse — i.  e.,  a  closed  orbit  around  which  the  body 
will  revolve  time  after  time  in  endless  succession.  We 
note  in  Fig.  115  that  when  the  Leonid  swarm  encountered 
Uranus  it  passed  in  front  of  the  planet  and  had  its  velocity 
diminished  and  its  orbit  changed  into  an  ellipse  thereby. 
It  might  have  passed  behind  Uranus,  it  would  have  passed 
behind  had  it  come  a  little  later,  and  the  effect  would  then 
have  been  just  the  opposite.  Its  velocity  would  have  been 
increased,  its  orbit  changed  to  a  hyperbola,  and  it  would 
have  left  the  solar  system  more  rapidly  than  it  came  into 
it,  thrust  out  instead  of  held  in  by  the  disturbing  planet. 
Of  such  cases  we  can  expect  no  record  to  remain,  but  the 
captured  comet  is  its  own  witness  to  what  has  happened, 
and  bears  imprinted  upon  its  orbit  the  brand  of  the  planet 
which  slowed  down  its  motion.  Thus  in  Fig.  115  the  changed 
orbit  of  the  meteors  has  its  aphelion  (part  remotest  from 
the  sun)  quite  close  to  the  orbit  of  Uranus,  and  one  of  its 
nodes,  y,  the  point  in  which  it  cuts  through  the  plane  of 
the  ecliptic  from  north  to  south  side,  is  also  very  near  to 
the  same  orbit.  It  is  these  two  marks,  aphelion  and  node, 
which  by  their  position  identify  Uranus  as  the  planet  in- 
strumental in  capturing  the  meteor  swarm,  and  the  date  of 
the  capture  is  found  by  working  back  with  their  respective 
periodic  times  to  an  epoch  at  which  planet  and  comet  were 
simultaneously  near  this  node. 

Jupiter,  by  reason  of  his  great  mass,  is  an  especially  effi- 
cient capturer  of  comets,  and  Fig.  116  shows  his  group  of 


COMETS  AND  METEORS  279 

captives,  his  family  of  comets  as  they  are  sometimes  called. 
The  several  orbits  are  marked  with  the  names  commonly 
given  to  the  comets.  Frequently  this  is  the  name  of  their 
discoverer,  but  often  a  different  system  is  followed — e.  g., 


FIG.  116.— Jupiter's  family  of  comets. 

the  name  1886,  IV,  means  the  fourth  comet  to  pass  through 
perihelion  in  the  year  1886.  The  other  great  planets — 
Saturn,  Uranus,  Neptune — have  also  their  families  of  cap- 
tured comets,  and  according  to  Schulhof,  who  does  not 
entirely  agree  with  the  common  opinion  about  captured 
comets,  the  earth  has  caught  no  less  than  nine  of  these 
bodies. 

1 77.  Comet  groups. — But  there  is  another  kind  of  comet 
family,  or  comet  group  as  it  is  called,  which  deserves  some 
notice,  and  which  is  best  exemplified  by  the  Great  Comet  of 
1882  and  its  relatives.  No  less  than  four  other  comets  are 
known  to  be  traveling  in  substantially  the  same  orbit  with 


280  ASTRONOMY 

this  one,  the  group  consisting  of  comets  1668,  I ;  1843,  I ; 
1880,  I ;  1882,  II ;  1887,  I.  The  orbit  itself  is  not  quite  a 
parabola,  but  a  very  elongated  ellipse,  whose  major  axis 
and  corresponding  periodic  time  can  not  be  very  accu- 
rately determined  from  the  available  data,  but  it  certainly 
extends  far  beyond  the  orbit  of  Neptune,  and  requires  not 
less  than  500  years  for  the  comet  to  complete  a  revolution 
in  it.  It  was  for  a  time  supposed  that  some  one  of  the 
recent  comets  of  this  group  of  five  might  be  a  return  of 
the  comet  of  1668  brought  back  ahead  of  time  by  unknown 
perturbations.  There  is  still  a  possibility  of  this,  but  it  is 
quite  out  of  the  question  to  suppose  that  the  last  four 
members  of  the  group  are  anything  other  than  separate 
and  distinct  comets  moving  in  practically  the  same  orbit. 
This  common  orbit  suggests  a  common  origin  for  the 
comets,  but  leaves  us  to  conjecture  how  they  became  sep- 
arated. 

The  observed  orbits  of  these  five  comets  present  some 
slight  discordances  among  themselves,  but  if  we  suppose 
each  comet  to  move  in  the  average  of  the  observed  paths  it 
is  a  simple  matter  to  fix  their  several  positions  at  the  pres- 
ent time.  They  have  all  receded  from  the  sun  nearly  on 
line  toward  the  bright  star  Sirius,  and  were  all  of  them,  at 
the  beginning  of  the  year  1900,  standing  nearly  motionless 
inside  of  a  space  not  bigger  than  the  sun  and  distant  from 
the  sun  about  150  radii  of  the  earth's  orbit.  The  great 
rapidity  with  which  they  swept  through  that  part  of  their 
orbit  near  the  sun  (see  §  162)  is  being  compensated  by 
the  present  extreme  slowness  of  their  motions,  so  that 
the  comets  of  1668  and  1882,  whose  passages  through  the 
solar  system  were  separated  by  an  interval  of  more  than 
two  centuries,  now  stand  together  near  the  aphelion  of  their 
orbits,  separated  by  a  distance  only  50  per  cent  greater  than 
the  diameter  of  the  moon's  orbit,  and  they  will  continue 
substantially  in  this  position  for  some  two  or  three  centu- 
ries to  come. 


I had never tried a cigarette, but I took a look at the book afterward 
out of curiosity. The author employs an interesting strategy to help 


smokers eliminate their cravings. He systematically reframes each cue 
associated with smoking and gives it a new meaning. 

He says things like: 

■ You think you are quitting something, but you’re not quitting 
anything because cigarettes do nothing for you, 

■ You think smoking is something you need to do to be social, but 
it’s not. You can be social without smoking at all, 

■ You think smoking is about relieving stress, but it’s not. Smoking 
does not relieve your nerves, it destroys them. 

Over and over, he repeats these phrases and others like them, “Get 
it clearly into your mind,” he says, “You are losing nothing and you are 
making marvelous positive gains not only in health, energy and money 
but also in confidence, self-respect, freedom and, most important of 
all, in the length and quality of your future life,” 

By the time you get to the end of the book, smoking seems like the 
most ridiculous thing in the world to do. And if you no longer expect 
smoking to bring you any benefits, you have no reason to smoke. It is 
an inversion of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change: make it unattractive. 

Now, I know this idea might sound overly simplistic. Just change your 
mind and you can quit smoking. But stick with me for a minute. 


WHERE CRAVINGS COME FROM 

Every behavior has a surface level craving and a deeper, underlying 
motive, I often have a craving that goes something like this: “I want to 
eat tacos,” If you were to ask me why I want to eat tacos, I wouldn’t 
say, “Because I need food to survive,” But the truth is, somewhere deep 
down, I am motivated to eat tacos because I have to eat to survive. The 
underlying motive is to obtain food and water even if my specific 
craving is for a taco. 

Some of our underlying motives include:* 

■ Conserve energy 

■ Obtain food and water 


■ Find love and reproduce 

■ Connect and bond with others 

■ Win social acceptance and approval 

■ Reduce uncertainty 

■ Achieve status and prestige 

A craving is just a specific manifestation of a deeper underlying 
motive. Your brain did not evolve with a desire to smoke cigarettes or 
to check Instagram or to play video games. At a deep level, you simply 
want to reduce uncertainty and relieve anxiety, to win social 
acceptance and approval, or to achieve status. 

Look at nearly any product that is habit-forming and you’ll see that 
it does not create a new motivation, but rather latches onto the 
underlying motives of human nature, 

■ Find love and reproduce = using Tinder 

■ Connect and bond with others = browsing Facebook 

■ Win social acceptance and approval = posting on Instagram 

■ Reduce uncertainty = searching on Google 

■ Achieve status and prestige = playing video games 

Your habits are modern-day solutions to ancient desires. New 
versions of old vices. The underlying motives behind human behavior 
remain the same. The specific habits we perform differ based on the 
period of history, 

Here’s the powerful part: there are many different ways to address 
the same underlying motive. One person might learn to reduce stress 
by smoking a cigarette. Another person learns to ease their anxiety by 
going for a run. Your current habits are not necessarily the best way to 
solve the problems you face; they are just the methods you learned to 
use. Once you associate a solution with the problem you need to solve, 
you keep coming back to it. 

Habits are all about associations. These associations determine 
whether we predict a habit to be worth repeating or not. As we covered 
in our discussion of the ist Law, your brain is continually absorbing 



information and noticing cues in the environment. Every time you 
perceive a cue, your brain runs a simulation and makes a prediction 
about what to do in the next moment. 

Cue: You notice that the stove is hot. 

Prediction: If I touch it I’ll get burned, so I should avoid touehing it. 

Cue: You see that the traffic light turned green. 

Prediction: If I step on the gas, I’ll make it safely through the 
interseetion and get closer to my destination, so I should step on the 
gas. 

You see a cue, categorize it based on past experience, and determine 
the appropriate response. 

This all happens in an instant, but it plays a crucial role in your 
habits because every action is preceded by a prediction. Life feels 
reactive, but it is actually predictive. All day long, you are making your 
best guess of how to act given what you’ve just seen and what has 
worked for you in the past. You are endlessly predicting what will 
happen in the next moment. 

Our behavior is heavily dependent on these predictions. Put another 
way, our behavior is heavily dependent on how we interpret the events 
that happen to us, not necessarily the objective reality of the events 
themselves. Two people can look at the same cigarette, and one feels 
the urge to smoke while the other is repulsed by the smell. The same 
cue can spark a good habit or a bad habit depending on your 
prediction. The cause of your habits is actually the prediction that 
precedes them. 

These predictions lead to feelings, which is how we typically 
describe a craving—a feeling, a desire, an urge. Feelings and emotions 
transform the cues we perceive and the predictions we make into a 
signal that we can apply. They help explain what we are currently 
sensing. For instance, whether or not you realize it, you are noticing 
how warm or cold you feel right now. If the temperature drops by one 
degree, you probably won’t do anything. If the temperature drops ten 
degrees, however, you’ll feel cold and put on another layer of clothing. 
Feeling cold was the signal that prompted you to act. You have been 
sensing the cues the entire time, but it is only when you predict that 
you would be better off in a different state that you take action. 



A craving is the sense that something is missing. It is the desire to 
change your internal state. When the temperature falls, there is a gap 
between what your body is currently sensing and what it wants to be 
sensing. This gap between your current state and your desired state 
provides a reason to act. 

Desire is the difference between where you are now and where you 
want to be in the future. Even the tiniest action is tinged with the 
motivation to feel differently than you do in the moment. When you 
binge-eat or light up or browse social media, what you really want is 
not a potato chip or a cigarette or a bunch of likes. What you really 
want is to feel different. 

Our feelings and emotions tell us whether to hold steady in our 
current state or to make a change. They help us decide the best course 
of action. Neurologists have discovered that when emotions and 
feelings are impaired, we actually lose the ability to make decisions. 

We have no signal of what to pursue and what to avoid. As the 
neuroscientist Antonio Damasio explains, “It is emotion that allows 
you to mark things as good, bad, or indifferent.” 

To summarize, the specific cravings you feel and habits you perform 
are really an attempt to address your fundamental underlying motives. 
Whenever a habit successfully addresses a motive, you develop a 
craving to do it again. In time, you learn to predict that checking social 
media will help you feel loved or that watching YouTube will allow you 
to forget your fears. Habits are attractive when we associate them with 
positive feelings, and we can use this insight to our advantage rather 
than to our detriment. 


HOW TO REPROGRAM YOUR BRAIN TO ENJOY HARD HABITS 

You can make hard habits more attractive if you can learn to associate 
them with a positive experience. Sometimes, all you need is a slight 
mind-set shift. For instance, we often talk about everything we have to 
do in a given day. You have to wake up early for work. You have to 
make another sales call for your business. You have to cook dinner for 
your family. 

Now, imagine changing just one word: You don’t “have” to. You 
“get” to. 



You get to wake up early for work. You get to make another sales 
call for your business. You get to cook dinner for your family. By 
simply changing one word, you shift the way you view each event. You 
transition from seeing these behaviors as burdens and turn them into 
opportunities. 

The key point is that both versions of reality are true. You have to 
do those things, and you also get to do them. We can find evidence for 
whatever mind-set we choose, 

I once heard a story about a man who uses a wheelchair. When 
asked if it was difficult being confined, he responded, “I’m not confined 
to my wheelchair—I am liberated by it. If it wasn’t for my wheelchair, I 
would be bed-bound and never able to leave my house.” This shift in 
perspective completely transformed how he lived each day. 

Reframing your habits to highlight their benefits rather than their 
drawbacks is a fast and lightweight way to reprogram your mind and 
make a habit seem more attractive. 

Exercise. Many people associate exercise with being a challenging 
task that drains energy and wears you down. You can just as easily 
view it as a way to develop skills and build you up. Instead of telling 
yourself “I need to go run in the morning,” say “It’s time to build 
endurance and get fast.” 

Finance. Saving money is often associated with sacrifice. However, 
you can associate it with freedom rather than limitation if you realize 
one simple truth: living below your current means inereases your 
future means. The money you save this month increases your 
purchasing power next month. 

Meditation. Anyone who has tried meditation for more than three 
seconds knows how frustrating it can be when the next distraction 
inevitably pops into your mind. You can transform frustration into 
delight when you realize that each interruption gives you a chance to 
practice returning to your breath. Distraction is a good thing because 
you need distractions to practice meditation. 

Pregame jitters. Many people feel anxious before delivering a big 
presentation or competing in an important event. They experience 
quicker breathing, a faster heart rate, heightened arousal. If we 
interpret these feelings negatively, then we feel threatened and tense 
up. If we interpret these feelings positively, then we can respond with 



fluidity and grace. You can reframe “I am nervous” to “I am excited 
and I’m getting an adrenaline rush to help me concentrate.” 

These little mind-set shifts aren’t magic, but they can help change 
the feelings you associate with a particular habit or situation. 

If you want to take it a step further, you can create a motivation 
ritual You simply practice associating your habits with something you 
enjoy, then you can use that cue whenever you need a bit of 
motivation. For instance, if you always play the same song before 
having sex, then you’ll begin to link the music with the act. Whenever 
you want to get in the mood, just press play. 

Ed Latimore, a boxer and writer from Pittsburgh, benefited from a 
similar strategy without knowing it. “Odd realization,” he wrote. “My 
focus and concentration goes up just by putting my headphones [on] 
while writing. I don’t even have to play any music.” Without realizing 
it, he was conditioning himself. In the beginning, he put his 
headphones on, played some music he enjoyed, and did focused work. 
After doing it five, ten, twenty times, putting his headphones on 
became a cue that he automatically associated with increased focus. 
The craving followed naturally. 

Athletes use similar strategies to get themselves in the mind-set to 
perform. During my baseball career, I developed a specific ritual of 
stretching and throwing before each game. The whole sequence took 
about ten minutes, and I did it the same way every single time. While it 
physically warmed me up to play, more importantly, it put me in the 
right mental state. I began to associate my pregame ritual with feeling 
competitive and focused. Even if I wasn’t motivated beforehand, by the 
time I was done with my ritual, I was in “game mode.” 

You can adapt this strategy for nearly any purpose. Say you want to 
feel happier in general. Find something that makes you truly happy- 
like petting your dog or taking a bubble bath—and then create a short 
routine that you perform every time before you do the thing you love. 
Maybe you take three deep breaths and smile. 

Three deep breaths. Smile. Pet the dog. Repeat. 

Eventually, you’ll begin to associate this breathe-and-smile routine 
with being in a good mood. It becomes a cue that means feeling happy. 
Once established, you can break it out anytime you need to change 
your emotional state. Stressed at work? Take three deep breaths and 



smile. Sad about life? Three deep breaths and smile. Once a habit has 
been built, the cue can prompt a craving, even if it has little to do with 
the original situation. 

The key to finding and fixing the causes of your bad habits is to 
reframe the associations you have about them. It’s not easy, but if you 
can reprogram your predictions, you can transform a hard habit into 
an attractive one. 

Chapter Summary 

■ The inversion of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change is make it 
unattractive. 

■ Every behavior has a surface level craving and a deeper 
underlying motive. 

■ Your habits are modern-day solutions to ancient desires. 

■ The cause of your habits is actually the prediction that precedes 
them. The prediction leads to a feeling. 

■ Highlight the benefits of avoiding a bad habit to make it seem 
unattractive. 

■ Habits are attractive when we associate them with positive 
feelings and unattractive when we associate them with negative 
feelings. Create a motivation ritual by doing something you enjoy 
immediately before a difficult habit. 

HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT 

I I 


The 1st Law: Make It Obvious 


1.1: Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them. 
1.2: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].” 

1.3: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].” 

1.4: Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible. 


The 2nd Law: Make It Attractive 


2.1: Use temptation bundling. Pair an action you want io do with an action you need to do. 
2.2: Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior. 

2.3: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit. 


The 3rd Law: Make It Easy 
The 4th Law: Make It Satisfying 


HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT 














Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible 


1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment. 


Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive 


2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits. 


Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult 
Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying 


You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: 
atomichabits.com/cheatsheet 














THE 3RD LAW 


Make It Easy 


11 


Walk Slowly, but Never Backward 

O N THE FIRST day of class, Jerry Uelsmann, a professor at the 

University of Florida, divided his film photography students into 
two groups. 

Everyone on the left side of the classroom, he explained, would be in 
the “quantity” group. They would be graded solely on the amount of 
work they produced. On the final day of class, he would tally the 
number of photos submitted by each student. One hundred photos 
would rate an A, ninety photos a B, eighty photos a C, and so on. 

Meanwhile, everyone on the right side of the room would be in the 
“quality” group. They would be graded only on the excellence of their 
work. They would only need to produce one photo during the semester, 
but to get an A, it had to be a nearly perfect image. 

At the end of the term, he was surprised to find that all the best 
photos were produced by the quantity group. During the semester, 
these students were busy taking photos, experimenting with 
composition and lighting, testing out various methods in the 
darkroom, and learning from their mistakes. In the process of creating 
hundreds of photos, they honed their skills. Meanwhile, the quality 
group sat around speculating about perfection. In the end, they had 
little to show for their efforts other than unverified theories and one 
mediocre photo.* 

It is easy to get bogged down trying to find the optimal plan for 
change: the fastest way to lose weight, the best program to build 
muscle, the perfect idea for a side hustle. We are so focused on figuring 
out the best approach that we never get around to taking action. As 
Voltaire once wrote, “The best is the enemy of the good.” 


I refer to this as the difference between being in motion and taking 
action. The two ideas sound similar, but they’re not the same. When 
you’re in motion, you’re planning and strategizing and learning. Those 
are all good things, but they don’t produce a result. 

Action, on the other hand, is the type of behavior that will deliver an 
outcome. If I outline twenty ideas for articles I want to write, that’s 
motion. If I actually sit down and write an article, that’s action. If I 
search for a better diet plan and read a few books on the topic, that’s 
motion. If I actually eat a healthy meal, that’s action. 

Sometimes motion is useful, but it will never produce an outcome 
by itself. It doesn’t matter how many times you go talk to the personal 
trainer, that motion will never get you in shape. Only the action of 
working out will get the result you’re looking to achieve. 

If motion doesn’t lead to results, why do we do it? Sometimes we do 
it because we actually need to plan or learn more. But more often than 
not, we do it because motion allows us to feel like we’re making 
progress without running the risk of failure. Most of us are experts at 
avoiding criticism. It doesn’t feel good to fail or to be judged publicly, 
so we tend to avoid situations where that might happen. And that’s the 
biggest reason why you slip into motion rather than taking action: you 
want to delay failure. 

It’s easy to be in motion and convince yourself that you’re still 
making progress. You think, ‘Tve got conversations going with four 
potential elients right now. This is good. We’re moving in the right 
direetion.” Or, “I brainstormed some ideas for that book I want to 
write. This is eoming together.” 

Motion makes you feel like you’re getting things done. But really, 
you’re just preparing to get something done. When preparation 
becomes a form of procrastination, you need to change something. You 
don’t want to merely be planning. You want to be practicing. 

If you want to master a habit, the key is to start with repetition, not 
perfection. You don’t need to map out every feature of a new habit. You 
just need to practice it. This is the first takeaway of the 3rd Law: you 
just need to get your reps in. 


HOW LONG DOES IT ACTUALLY TAKE TO FORM A NEW HABIT? 



Habit formation is the process by which a behavior becomes 
progressively more automatic through repetition. The more you repeat 
an activity, the more the structure of your brain changes to become 
efficient at that activity. Neuroscientists call this long-term 
potentiation, which refers to the strengthening of connections between 
neurons in the brain based on recent patterns of activity. With each 
repetition, cell-to-cell signaling improves and the neural connections 
tighten. First described by neuropsychologist Donald Hebb in 1949, 
this phenomenon is commonly known as Hebb’s Law: “Neurons that 
fire together wire together,” 

Repeating a habit leads to clear physical changes in the brain. In 
musicians, the cerebellum—critical for physical movements like 
plucking a guitar string or pulling a violin bow—is larger than it is in 
nonmusicians. Mathematicians, meanwhile, have increased gray 
matter in the inferior parietal lobule, which plays a key role in 
computation and calculation. Its size is directly correlated with the 
amount of time spent in the field; the older and more experienced the 
mathematician, the greater the increase in gray matter. 

When scientists analyzed the brains of taxi drivers in London, they 
found that the hippocampus—a region of the brain involved in spatial 
memory—was significantly larger in their subjects than in non-taxi 
drivers. Even more fascinating, the hippocampus decreased in size 
when a driver retired. Like the muscles of the body responding to 
regular weight training, particular regions of the brain adapt as they 
are used and atrophy as they are abandoned. 

Of course, the importance of repetition in establishing habits was 
recognized long before neuroscientists began poking around. In i860, 
the English philosopher George H, Lewes noted, “In learning to speak 
a new language, to play on a musical instrument, or to perform 
unaccustomed movements, great difficulty is felt, because the channels 
through which each sensation has to pass have not become 
established; but no sooner has frequent repetition cut a pathway, than 
this difficulty vanishes; the actions become so automatic that they can 
be performed while the mind is otherwise engaged,” Both common 
sense and scientific evidence agree: repetition is a form of change. 

Each time you repeat an action, you are activating a particular 
neural circuit associated with that habit. This means that simply 
putting in your reps is one of the most critical steps you can take to 



encoding a new habit. It is why the students who took tons of photos 
improved their skills while those who merely theorized about perfect 
photos did not. One group engaged in active practice, the other in 
passive learning. One in action, the other in motion. 

All habits follow a similar trajectory from effortful practice to 
automatic behavior, a process known as automaticity. Automaticity is 
the ability to perform a behavior without thinking about each step, 
which occurs when the nonconscious mind takes over. 

It looks something like this: 


THE HABIT LINE 



FIGURE 11: In the beginning (point A), a habit requires a good deal of effort 
and concentration to perform. After a few repetitions (point B), it gets easier, 
but still requires some conscious attention. With enough practice (point C), 
the habit becomes more automatic than conscious. Beyond this threshold 
—the habit line —the behavior can be done more or less without thinking. A 
new habit has been formed. 


On the following page, you’ll see what it looks like when researchers 
track the level of automaticity for an actual habit like walking for ten 
minutes each day. The shape of these charts, which scientists call 






learning curves, reveals an important truth about behavior change: 
habits form based on frequency, not time. 


WALKING 10 MINUTES PER DAY 


AUTOMATICITY 



FIGURE 12: This graph shows someone who built the habit of walking for 
ten minutes after breakfast each day. Notice that as the repetitions increase, 
so does automaticity, until the behavior is as easy and automatic as it can 
be. 

One of the most common questions I hear is, “How long does it take 
to build a new habit?” But what people really should be asking is, “How 
many does it take to form a new habit?” That is, how many repetitions 
are required to make a habit automatic? 

There is nothing magical about time passing with regard to habit 
formation. It doesn’t matter if it’s been twenty-one days or thirty days 
or three hundred days. What matters is the rate at which you perform 
the behavior. You could do something twice in thirty days, or two 
hundred times. It’s the frequency that makes the difference. Your 
current habits have been internalized over the course of hundreds, if 
not thousands, of repetitions. New habits require the same level of 
frequency. You need to string together enough successful attempts 
until the behavior is firmly embedded in your mind and you cross the 
Habit Line. 




In practice, it doesn’t really matter how long it takes for a habit to 
become automatic. What matters is that you take the actions you need 
to take to make progress. Whether an action is fully automatic is of less 
importance. 

To build a habit, you need to practice it. And the most effective way 
to make practice happen is to adhere to the 3rd Law of Behavior 
Change: make it easy. The chapters that follow will show you how to 
do exactly that. 

Chapter Summary 

■ The 3rd Law of Behavior Change is make it easy. 

■ The most effective form of learning is practice, not planning. 

■ Focus on taking action, not being in motion. 

■ Habit formation is the process by which a behavior becomes 
progressively more automatic through repetition. 

■ The amount of time you have been performing a habit is not as 
important as the number of times you have performed it. 



12 


The Law of Least Effort 

I N HIS AWARD-WINNING BOOK, Guns, Germs, and Steel, anthropologist 
and biologist Jared Diamond points out a simple fact: different 
continents have different shapes. At first glance, this statement seems 
rather obvious and unimportant, but it turns out to have a profound 
impact on human behavior. 

The primary axis of the Americas runs from north to south. That is, 
the landmass of North and South America tends to be tall and thin 
rather than wide and fat. The same is generally true for Africa. 
Meanwhile, the landmass that makes up Europe, Asia, and the Middle 
East is the opposite. This massive stretch of land tends to be more east- 
west in shape. According to Diamond, this difference in shape played a 
significant role in the spread of agriculture over the centuries. 

When agriculture began to spread around the globe, farmers had an 
easier time expanding along east-west routes than along north-south 
ones. This is because locations along the same latitude generally share 
similar climates, amounts of sunlight and rainfall, and changes in 
season. These factors allowed farmers in Europe and Asia to 
domesticate a few crops and grow them along the entire stretch of land 
from Erance to China. 


THE SHAPE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR 


EAST - WEST ORIENTATION 


/ 




FIGURE 13: The primary axis of Europe and Asia is east-west. The primary 
axis of the Americas and Africa is north-south. This leads to a wider range of 
climates up-and-down the Americas than across Europe and Asia. As a 
result, agriculture spread nearly twice as fast across Europe and Asia than it 
did elsewhere. The behavior of farmers—even across hundreds or 
thousands of years—was constrained by the amount of friction in the 
environment. 


By comparison, the climate varies greatly when traveling from north 
to south. Just imagine how different the weather is in Florida 
compared to Canada. You can be the most talented farmer in the 
world, but it won’t help you grow Florida oranges in the Canadian 
winter. Snow is a poor substitute for soil. In order to spread crops 
along north-south routes, farmers would need to find and domesticate 
new plants whenever the climate changed. 

As a result, agriculture spread two to three times faster across Asia 
and Europe than it did up and down the Americas. Over the span of 
centuries, this small difference had a very big impact. Increased food 
production allowed for more rapid population growth. With more 
people, these cultures were able to build stronger armies and were 
better equipped to develop new technologies. The changes started out 





small—a crop that spread slightly farther, a population that grew 
slightly faster—but compounded into substantial differences over time. 

The spread of agriculture provides an example of the 3rd Law of 
Behavior Change on a global scale. Conventional wisdom holds that 
motivation is the key to habit change. Maybe if you really wanted it, 
you’d actually do it. But the truth is, our real motivation is to be lazy 
and to do what is convenient. And despite what the latest productivity 
best seller will tell you, this is a smart strategy, not a dumb one. 

Energy is precious, and the brain is wired to conserve it whenever 
possible. It is human nature to follow the Law of Least Effort, which 
states that when deciding between two similar options, people will 
naturally gravitate toward the option that requires the least amount of 
work.* For example, expanding your farm to the east where you can 
grow the same crops rather than heading north where the climate is 
different. Out of all the possible actions we could take, the one that is 
realized is the one that delivers the most value for the least effort. We 
are motivated to do what is easy. 

Every action requires a certain amount of energy. The more energy 
required, the less likely it is to occur. If your goal is to do a hundred 
push-ups per day, that’s a lot of energy! In the beginning, when you’re 
motivated and excited, you can muster the strength to get started. But 
after a few days, such a massive effort feels exhausting. Meanwhile, 
sticking to the habit of doing one push-up per day requires almost no 
energy to get started. And the less energy a habit requires, the more 
likely it is to occur. 

Look at any behavior that fills up much of your life and you’ll see 
that it can be performed with very low levels of motivation. Habits like 
scrolling on our phones, checking email, and watching television steal 
so much of our time because they can be performed almost without 
effort. They are remarkably convenient. 

In a sense, every habit is just an obstacle to getting what you really 
want. Dieting is an obstacle to getting fit. Meditation is an obstacle to 
feeling calm. Journaling is an obstacle to thinking clearly. You don’t 
actually want the habit itself. What you really want is the outcome the 
habit delivers. The greater the obstacle—that is, the more difficult the 
habit—the more friction there is between you and your desired end 
state. This is why it is crucial to make your habits so easy that you’ll do 


them even when you don’t feel like it. If you can make your good habits 
more convenient, you’ll be more likely to follow through on them. 

But what about all the moments when we seem to do the opposite? 
If we’re all so lazy, then how do you explain people accomplishing hard 
things like raising a child or starting a business or climbing Mount 
Everest? 

Certainly, you are capable of doing very hard things. The problem is 
that some days you feel like doing the hard work and some days you 
feel like giving in. On the tough days, it’s crucial to have as many things 
working in your favor as possible so that you can overcome the 
challenges life naturally throws your way. The less friction you face, the 
easier it is for your stronger self to emerge. The idea behind make it 
easy is not to only do easy things. The idea is to make it as easy as 
possible in the moment to do things that payoff in the long run. 


HOW TO ACHIEVE MORE WITH LESS EFFORT 

Imagine you are holding a garden hose that is bent in the middle. 

Some water can flow through, but not very much. If you want to 
increase the rate at which water passes through the hose, you have two 
options. The first option is to crank up the valve and force more water 
out. The second option is to simply remove the bend in the hose and let 
water flow through naturally. 

Trying to pump up your motivation to stick with a hard habit is like 
trying to force water through a bent hose. You can do it, but it requires 
a lot of effort and increases the tension in your life. Meanwhile, making 
your habits simple and easy is like removing the bend in the hose. 
Rather than trying to overcome the friction in your life, you reduce it. 

One of the most effective ways to reduce the friction associated with 
your habits is to practice environment design. In Chapter 6, we 
discussed environment design as a method for making cues more 
obvious, but you can also optimize your environment to make actions 
easier. For example, when deciding where to practice a new habit, it is 
best to choose a place that is already along the path of your daily 
routine. Habits are easier to build when they fit into the flow of your 
life. You are more likely to go to the gym if it is on your way to work 
because stopping doesn’t add much friction to your lifestyle. By 



comparison, if the gym is off the path of your normal commute—even 
by just a few blocks—now you’re going “out of your way” to get there. 

Perhaps even more effective is reducing the friction within your 
home or office. Too often, we try to start habits in high-friction 
environments. We try to follow a strict diet while we are out to dinner 
with friends. We try to write a book in a chaotic household. We try to 
concentrate while using a smartphone filled with distractions. It 
doesn’t have to be this way. We can remove the points of friction that 
hold us back. This is precisely what electronics manufacturers in Japan 
began to do in the 1970s. 

In an article published in the New Yorker titled “Better All the 
Time,” James Suroweicki writes: 

“Japanese firms emphasized what came to be known as ‘lean 
production,’ relentlessly looking to remove waste of all kinds from the 
production process, down to redesigning workspaces, so workers 
didn’t have to waste time twisting and turning to reach their tools. The 
result was that Japanese factories were more efficient and Japanese 
products were more reliable than American ones. In 1974, service calls 
for American-made color televisions were five times as common as for 
Japanese televisions. By 1979, it took American workers three times as 
long to assemble their sets.” 

I like to refer to this strategy as addition by subtraetion.* The 
Japanese companies looked for every point of friction in the 
manufacturing process and eliminated it. As they subtracted wasted 
effort, they added customers and revenue. Similarly, when we remove 
the points of friction that sap our time and energy, we can achieve 
more with less effort. (This is one reason tidying up can feel so good: 
we are simultaneously moving forward and lightening the cognitive 
load our environment places on us.) 

If you look at the most habit-forming products, you’ll notice that 
one of the things these goods and services do best is remove little bits 
of friction from your life. Meal delivery services reduce the friction of 
shopping for groceries. Dating apps reduce the friction of making 
social introductions. Ride-sharing services reduce the friction of 
getting across town. Text messaging reduces the friction of sending a 
letter in the mail. 


Like a Japanese television manufacturer redesigning their 
workspace to reduce wasted motion, successful companies design their 
products to automate, eliminate, or simplify as many steps as possible. 
They reduce the number of fields on each form. They pare down the 
number of clicks required to create an account. They deliver their 
products with easy-to-understand directions or ask their customers to 
make fewer choices. 

When the first voice-activated speakers were released—products 
like Google Home, Amazon Echo, and Apple HomePod—I asked a 
friend what he liked about the product he had purchased. He said it 
was just easier to say “Play some country music” than to pull out his 
phone, open the music app, and pick a playlist. Of course, just a few 
years earlier, having unlimited access to music in your pocket was a 
remarkably frictionless behavior compared to driving to the store and 
buying a CD. Business is a never-ending quest to deliver the same 
result in an easier fashion. 

Similar strategies have been used effectively by governments. When 
the British government wanted to increase tax collection rates, they 
switched from sending citizens to a web page where the tax form could 
be downloaded to linking directly to the form. Reducing that one step 
in the process increased the response rate from 19,2 percent to 23.4 
percent. For a country like the United Kingdom, those percentage 
points represent millions in tax revenue. 

The central idea is to create an environment where doing the right 
thing is as easy as possible. Much of the battle of building better habits 
comes down to finding ways to reduce the friction associated with our 
good habits and increase the friction associated with our bad ones. 


PRIME THE ENVIRONMENT FOR FUTURE USE 

Oswald Nuckols is an IT developer from Natchez, Mississippi, He is 
also someone who understands the power of priming his environment, 

Nuckols dialed in his cleaning habits by following a strategy he 
refers to as “resetting the room,” For instance, when he finishes 
watching television, he places the remote back on the TV stand, 
arranges the pillows on the couch, and folds the blanket. When he 
leaves his car, he throws any trash away. Whenever he takes a shower, 
he wipes down the toilet while the shower is warming up, (As he notes. 



the “perfect time to clean the toilet is right before you wash yourself in 
the shower anyway.”) The purpose of resetting each room is not simply 
to clean up after the last action, but to prepare for the next action, 

“When I walk into a room everything is in its right place,” Nuckols 
wrote. “Because I do this every day in every room, stuff always stays in 
good shape.... People think I work hard but I’m actually really lazy. 
I’m just proactively lazy. It gives you so much time back,” 

Whenever you organize a space for its intended purpose, you are 
priming it to make the next action easy. For instance, my wife keeps a 
box of greeting cards that are presorted by occasion—birthday, 
sympathy, wedding, graduation, and more. Whenever necessary, she 
grabs an appropriate card and sends it off. She is incredibly good at 
remembering to send cards because she has reduced the friction of 
doing so. For years, I was the opposite. Someone would have a baby 
and I would think, “I should send a card.” But then weeks would pass 
and by the time I remembered to pick one up at the store, it was too 
late. The habit wasn’t easy. 

There are many ways to prime your environment so it’s ready for 
immediate use. If you want to cook a healthy breakfast, place the skillet 
on the stove, set the cooking spray on the counter, and lay out any 
plates and utensils you’ll need the night before. When you wake up, 
making breakfast will be easy. 

■ Want to draw more? Put your pencils, pens, notebooks, and 
drawing tools on top of your desk, within easy reach, 

■ Want to exercise? Set out your workout clothes, shoes, gym bag, 
and water bottle ahead of time. 

■ Want to improve your diet? Chop up a ton of fruits and vegetables 
on weekends and pack them in containers, so you have easy 
access to healthy, ready-to-eat options during the week. 

These are simple ways to make the good habit the path of least 
resistance. 

You can also invert this principle and prime the environment to 
make bad behaviors difficult. If you find yourself watching too much 
television, for example, then unplug it after each use. Only plug it back 



in if you can say out loud the name of the show you want to watch. This 
setup creates just enough friction to prevent mindless viewing. 

If that doesn’t do it, you can take it a step further. Unplug the 
television and take the batteries out of the remote after each use, so it 
takes an extra ten seconds to turn it back on. And if you’re really hard¬ 
core, move the television out of the living room and into a closet after 
each use. You can be sure you’ll only take it out when you really want 
to watch something. The greater the friction, the less likely the habit. 

Whenever possible, I leave my phone in a different room until 
lunch. When it’s right next to me. I’ll check it all morning for no reason 
at all. But when it is in another room, I rarely think about it. And the 
friction is high enough that I won’t go get it without a reason. As a 
result, I get three to four hours each morning when I can work without 
interruption. 

If sticking your phone in another room doesn’t seem like enough, 
tell a friend or family member to hide it from you for a few hours. Ask a 
coworker to keep it at their desk in the morning and give it back to you 
at lunch. 

It is remarkable how little friction is required to prevent unwanted 
behavior. When I hide beer in the back of the fridge where I can’t see it, 
I drink less. When I delete social media apps from my phone, it can be 
weeks before I download them again and log in. These tricks are 
unlikely to curb a true addiction, but for many of us, a little bit of 
friction can be the difference between sticking with a good habit or 
sliding into a bad one. Imagine the cumulative impact of making 
dozens of these changes and living in an environment designed to 
make the good behaviors easier and the bad behaviors harder. 

Whether we are approaching behavior change as an individual, a 
parent, a coach, or a leader, we should ask ourselves the same 
question: “How can we design a world where it’s easy to do what’s 
right?” Redesign your life so the actions that matter most are also the 
actions that are easiest to do. 

Chapter Summary 

■ Human behavior follows the Law of Least Effort. We will naturally 
gravitate toward the option that requires the least amount of 
work. 



Create an environment where doing the right thing is as easy as 
possible. 

Reduce the friction associated with good behaviors. When friction 
is low, habits are easy. 

Increase the friction associated with bad behaviors. When friction 
is high, habits are difficult. 

Prime your environment to make future actions easier. 



13 


How to Stop Procrastinating by Using the 

Two-Minute Rule 


T wyla Tharp is widely regarded as one of the greatest dancers and 
choreographers of the modern era. In 1992, she was awarded a 
MacArthur Fellowship, often referred to as the Genius Grant, and she 
has spent the bulk of her career touring the globe to perform her 
original works. She also credits much of her success to simple daily 
habits. 

“I begin each day of my life with a ritual,” she writes. “I wake up at 
5:30 A.M., put on my workout clothes, my leg warmers, my sweat shirt, 
and my hat. I walk outside my Manhattan home, hail a taxi, and tell 
the driver to take me to the Pumping Iron gym at 91st Street and First 
Avenue, where I work out for two hours. 

“The ritual is not the stretching and weight training I put my body 
through each morning at the gym; the ritual is the cab. The moment I 
tell the driver where to go I have completed the ritual. 

“It’s a simple act, but doing it the same way each morning 
habitualizes it—makes it repeatable, easy to do. It reduces the chance 
that I would skip it or do it differently. It is one more item in my 
arsenal of routines, and one less thing to think about.” 

Hailing a cab each morning may be a tiny action, but it is a splendid 
example of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change. 

Researchers estimate that 40 to 50 percent of our actions on any 
given day are done out of habit. This is already a substantial 
percentage, but the true influence of your habits is even greater than 
these numbers suggest. Habits are automatic choices that influence the 


conscious decisions that follow. Yes, a habit can be completed in just a 
few seconds, but it can also shape the actions that you take for minutes 
or hours afterward. 

Habits are like the entrance ramp to a highway. They lead you down 
a path and, before you know it, you’re speeding toward the next 
behavior. It seems to be easier to continue what you are already doing 
than to start doing something different. You sit through a bad movie 
for two hours. You keep snacking even when you’re already full. You 
check your phone for “just a second” and soon you have spent twenty 
minutes staring at the screen. In this way, the habits you follow 
without thinking often determine the choices you make when you are 
thinking. 

Each evening, there is a tiny moment—usually around 5:15 p.m.— 
that shapes the rest of my night. My wife walks in the door from work 
and either we change into our workout clothes and head to the gym or 
we crash onto the couch, order Indian food, and watch The Office.^ 
Similar to Twyla Tharp hailing the cab, the ritual is changing into my 
workout clothes. If I change clothes, I know the workout will happen. 
Everything that follows—driving to the gym, deciding which exercises 
to do, stepping under the bar—is easy once I’ve taken the first step. 

Every day, there are a handful of moments that deliver an outsized 
impact. I refer to these little choices as decisive moments. The moment 
you decide between ordering takeout or cooking dinner. The moment 
you choose between driving your car or riding your bike. The moment 
you decide between starting your homework or grabbing the video 
game controller. These choices are a fork in the road. 


DECISIVE MOMENTS 



FIGURE 14: The difference between a good day and a bad day is often a 
few productive and healthy choices made at decisive moments. Each one is 
like a fork in the road, and these choices stack up throughout the day and 
can ultimately lead to very different outcomes. 


Decisive moments set the options available to your future self. For 
instance, walking into a restaurant is a decisive moment because it 
determines what you’ll be eating for lunch. Technically, you are in 
control of what you order, but in a larger sense, you can only order an 
item if it is on the menu. If you walk into a steakhouse, you can get a 
sirloin or a rib eye, but not sushi. Your options are constrained by 
what’s available. They are shaped by the first choice. 

We are limited by where our habits lead us. This is why mastering 
the decisive moments throughout your day is so important. Each day is 
made up of many moments, but it is really a few habitual choices that 
determine the path you take. These little choices stack up, each one 
setting the trajectory for how you spend the next chunk of time. 



Habits are the entry point, not the end point. They are the cab, not 
the gym. 


THE TWO-MINUTE RULE 

Even when you know you should start small, it’s easy to start too big. 
When you dream about making a change, excitement inevitably takes 
over and you end up trying to do too much too soon. The most effective 
way I know to counteract this tendency is to use the Two-Minute Rule, 
which states, “When you start a new habit, it should take less than two 
minutes to do.” 

You’ll find that nearly any habit can be scaled down into a two- 
minute version: 

■ “Read before bed each night” becomes “Read one page.” 

■ “Do thirty minutes of yoga” becomes “Take out my yoga mat.” 

■ “Study for class” becomes “Open my notes.” 

■ “Fold the laundry” becomes “Fold one pair of socks.” 

■ “Run three miles” becomes “Tie my running shoes.” 

The idea is to make your habits as easy as possible to start. Anyone 
can meditate for one minute, read one page, or put one item of clothing 
away. And, as we have just discussed, this is a powerful strategy 
because once you’ve started doing the right thing, it is much easier to 
continue doing it. A new habit should not feel like a challenge. The 
actions that follow can be challenging, but the first two minutes should 
be easy. What you want is a “gateway habit” that naturally leads you 
down a more productive path. 

You can usually figure out the gateway habits that will lead to your 
desired outcome by mapping out your goals on a scale from “very easy” 
to “very hard.” For instance, running a marathon is very hard. Running 
a 5K is hard. Walking ten thousand steps is moderately difficult. 
Walking ten minutes is easy. And putting on your running shoes is very 
easy. Your goal might be to run a marathon, but your gateway habit is 
to put on your running shoes. That’s how you follow the Two-Minute 
Rule. 



Very easy 

Easy 

Moderate 

Hard 

Very hard 

Put on your running 
shoes 

Walk ten 
minutes 

Walk ten thousand 
steps 

Run a 5K 

Run a 
marathon 

Write one sentence 

Write one 
paragraph 

Write one thousand 
words 

Write a five-thousand- 
word article 

Write a 
book 

Open your notes 

Study for ten 
minutes 

Study for three 
hours 

Get straight A’s 

Earn a PhD 


People often think it’s weird to get hyped about reading one page or 
meditating for one minute or making one sales call. But the point is not 
to do one thing. The point is to master the habit of showing up. The 
truth is, a habit must be established before it can be improved. If you 
can’t learn the basic skill of showing up, then you have little hope of 
mastering the finer details. Instead of trying to engineer a perfect habit 
from the start, do the easy thing on a more consistent basis. You have 
to standardize before you can optimize. 

As you master the art of showing up, the first two minutes simply 
become a ritual at the beginning of a larger routine. This is not merely 
a hack to make habits easier but actually the ideal way to master a 
difficult skill. The more you ritualize the beginning of a process, the 
more likely it becomes that you can slip into the state of deep focus 
that is required to do great things. By doing the same warm-up before 
every workout, you make it easier to get into a state of peak 
performance. By following the same creative ritual, you make it easier 
to get into the hard work of creating. By developing a consistent 
power-down habit, you make it easier to get to bed at a reasonable time 
each night. You may not be able to automate the whole process, but 
you can make the first action mindless. Make it easy to start and the 
rest will follow. 

The Two-Minute Rule can seem like a trick to some people. You 
know that the real goal is to do more than just two minutes, so it may 
feel like you’re trying to fool yourself. Nobody is actually aspiring to 
read one page or do one push-up or open their notes. And if you know 
it’s a mental trick, why would you fall for it? 

If the Two-Minute Rule feels forced, try this: do it for two minutes 
and then stop. Go for a run, but you must stop after two minutes. Start 
meditating, but you must stop after two minutes. Study Arabic, but you 
















must stop after two minutes. It’s not a strategy for starting, it’s the 
whole thing. Your habit can only last one hundred and twenty seconds. 

One of my readers used this strategy to lose over one hundred 
pounds. In the beginning, he went to the gym each day, but he told 
himself he wasn’t allowed to stay for more than five minutes. He would 
go to the gym, exercise for five minutes, and leave as soon as his time 
was up. After a few weeks, he looked around and thought, “Well, I’m 
always coming here anyway. I might as well start staying a little 
longer.” A few years later, the weight was gone. 

Journaling provides another example. Nearly everyone can benefit 
from getting their thoughts out of their head and onto paper, but most 
people give up after a few days or avoid it entirely because journaling 
feels like a chore.* The secret is to always stay below the point where it 
feels like work, Greg McKeown, a leadership consultant from the 
United Kingdom, built a daily journaling habit by specifically writing 
less than he felt like. He always stopped journaling before it seemed 
like a hassle, Ernest Hemingway believed in similar advice for any kind 
of writing. “The best way is to always stop when you are going good,” 
he said. 

Strategies like this work for another reason, too: they reinforce the 
identity you want to build. If you show up at the gym five days in a row 
—even if it’s just for two minutes—you are casting votes for your new 
identity. You’re not worried about getting in shape. You’re focused on 
becoming the type of person who doesn’t miss workouts. You’re taking 
the smallest action that confirms the type of person you want to be. 

We rarely think about change this way because everyone is 
consumed by the end goal. But one push-up is better than not 
exercising. One minute of guitar practice is better than none at all. One 
minute of reading is better than never picking up a book. It’s better to 
do less than you hoped than to do nothing at all. 

At some point, once you’ve established the habit and you’re showing 
up each day, you can combine the Two-Minute Rule with a technique 
we call habit shaping to scale your habit back up toward your ultimate 
goal. Start by mastering the first two minutes of the smallest version of 
the behavior. Then, advance to an intermediate step and repeat the 
process—focusing on just the first two minutes and mastering that 
stage before moving on to the next level. Eventually, you’ll end up with 


the habit you had originally hoped to build while still keeping your 
focus where it should be: on the first two minutes of the behavior, 

EXAMPLES OF HABIT SHAPING 


Becoming an Early Riser 


Phase 1: Be home by 10 p.m. every night. 

Phase 2: Have all devices (TV, phone, etc.) turned off by 10 p.m. every night. 

Phase 3: Be in bed by 10 p.m. every night (reading a book, talking with your partner). 
Phase 4: Lights off by 10 p.m. every night. 

Phase 5: Wake up at 6 a.m. every day. 


Becoming Vegan 


Phase 1: Start eating vegetables at each meal. 

Phase 2: Stop eating animals with four legs (cow, pig, lamb, etc.). 

Phase 3: Stop eating animals with two legs (chicken, turkey, etc.). 

Phase 4: Stop eating animals with no legs (fish, clams, scallops, etc.). 

Phase 5: Stop eating all animal products (eggs, milk, cheese). 

I I 


Starting to Exercise 


Phase 1: Change into workout clothes. 

Phase 2: Step out the door (try taking a walk). 

Phase 3: Drive to the gym, exercise for five minutes, and leave. 

Phase 4: Exercise for fifteen minutes at least once per week. 

Phase 5: Exercise three times per week. 

Nearly any larger life goal can be transformed into a two-minute 
behavior. I want to live a healthy and long life > I need to stay in shape 
> I need to exercise > I need to change into my workout clothes, I want 
to have a happy marriage > I need to be a good partner > I should do 
something each day to make my partner’s life easier > I should meal 
plan for next week. 

Whenever you are struggling to stick with a habit, you can employ 
the Two-Minute Rule. It’s a simple way to make your habits easy. 

Chapter Summary 

■ Habits can be completed in a few seconds but continue to impact 
your behavior for minutes or hours afterward, 

■ Many habits occur at decisive moments—choices that are like a 
fork in the road—and either send you in the direction of a 


















productive day or an unproductive one. 

The Two-Minute Rule states, “When you start a new habit, it 
should take less than two minutes to do.” 

The more you ritualize the beginning of a process, the more likely 
it becomes that you can slip into the state of deep focus that is 
required to do great things. 

Standardize before you optimize. You can’t improve a habit that 
doesn’t exist. 



14 


How to Make Good Habits Inevitable and 
Bad Habits Impossible 

I N THE SUMMER OE1830, VictoF Hugo was facing an impossible deadline. 

Twelve months earlier, the French author had promised his 
publisher a new book. But instead of writing, he spent that year 
pursuing other projects, entertaining guests, and delaying his work. 
Frustrated, Hugo’s publisher responded by setting a deadline less than 
six months away. The book had to be finished by February 1831. 

Hugo concocted a strange plan to beat his procrastination. He 
collected all of his clothes and asked an assistant to lock them away in 
a large chest. He was left with nothing to wear except a large shawl. 
Lacking any suitable clothing to go outdoors, he remained in his study 
and wrote furiously during the fall and winter of 1830. The Hunchback 
of Notre Dame was published two weeks early on January 14,1831.* 

Sometimes success is less about making good habits easy and more 
about making bad habits hard. This is an inversion of the 3rd Law of 
Behavior Change: make it difficult. If you find yourself continually 
struggling to follow through on your plans, then you can take a page 
from Victor Hugo and make your bad habits more difficult by creating 
what psychologists call a commitment device. 

A commitment device is a choice you make in the present that 
controls your actions in the future. It is a way to lock in future 
behavior, bind you to good habits, and restrict you from bad ones. 
When Victor Hugo shut his clothes away so he could focus on writing, 
he was creating a commitment device.* 


There are many ways to create a commitment device. You can 
reduce overeating by purchasing food in individual packages rather 
than in bulk size. You can voluntarily ask to be added to the banned list 
at casinos and online poker sites to prevent future gambling sprees. 

I’ve even heard of athletes who have to “make weight” for a 
competition choosing to leave their wallets at home during the week 
before weigh-in so they won’t be tempted to buy fast food. 

As another example, my friend and fellow habits expert Nir Eyal 
purchased an outlet timer, which is an adapter that he plugged in 
between his internet router and the power outlet. At lo p.m. each 
night, the outlet timer cuts off the power to the router. When the 
internet goes off, everyone knows it is time to go to bed. 

Commitment devices are useful because they enable you to take 
advantage of good intentions before you can fall victim to temptation. 
Whenever I’m looking to cut calories, for example, I will ask the waiter 
to split my meal and box half of it to go before the meal is served. If I 
waited until the meal came out and told myself “I’ll just eat half,” it 
would never work. 

The key is to change the task such that it requires more work to get 
out of the good habit than to get started on it. If you’re feeling 
motivated to get in shape, schedule a yoga session and pay ahead of 
time. If you’re excited about the business you want to start, email an 
entrepreneur you respect and set up a consulting call. When the time 
comes to act, the only way to bail is to cancel the meeting, which 
requires effort and may cost money. 

Commitment devices increase the odds that you’ll do the right thing 
in the future by making bad habits difficult in the present. However, 
we can do even better. We can make good habits inevitable and bad 
habits impossible. 


HOW TO AUTOMATE A HABIT AND NEVER THINK ABOUT IT 

AGAIN 

John Henry Patterson was born in Dayton, Ohio, in 1844. He spent his 
childhood doing chores on the family farm and working shifts at his 
father’s sawmill. After attending college at Dartmouth, Patterson 
returned to Ohio and opened a small supply store for coal miners. 



It seemed like a good opportunity. The store faced little competition 
and enjoyed a steady stream of customers, but still struggled to make 
money. That was when Patterson discovered his employees were 
stealing from him. 

In the mid-i8oos, employee theft was a common problem. Receipts 
were kept in an open drawer and could easily be altered or discarded. 
There were no video cameras to review behavior and no software to 
track transactions. Unless you were willing to hover over your 
employees every minute of the day, or to manage all transactions 
yourself, it was difficult to prevent theft. 

As Patterson mulled over his predicament, he came across an 
advertisement for a new invention called Kitty’s Incorruptible Cashier, 
Designed by fellow Dayton resident James Ritty, it was the first cash 
register. The machine automatically locked the cash and receipts inside 
after each transaction. Patterson bought two for fifty dollars each. 

Employee theft at his store vanished overnight. In the next six 
months, Patterson’s business went from losing money to making 
$5,000 in profit—the equivalent of more than $100,000 today. 

Patterson was so impressed with the machine that he changed 
businesses. He bought the rights to Kitty’s invention and opened the 
National Cash Register Company, Ten years later. National Cash 
Register had over one thousand employees and was on its way to 
becoming one of the most successful businesses of its time. 

The best way to break a bad habit is to make it impractical to do. 
Increase the friction until you don’t even have the option to act. The 
brilliance of the cash register was that it automated ethical behavior by 
making stealing practically impossible. Rather than trying to change 
the employees, it made the preferred behavior automatic. 

Some actions—like installing a cash register—pay off again and 
again. These onetime choices require a little bit of effort up front but 
create increasing value over time. I’m fascinated by the idea that a 
single choice can deliver returns again and again, and I surveyed my 
readers on their favorite onetime actions that lead to better long-term 
habits. The table on the following page shares some of the most 
popular answers. 

I’d wager that if the average person were to simply do half of the 
onetime actions on this list—even if they didn’t give another thought to 



their habits—most would find themselves living a better life a year 
from now. These onetime actions are a straightforward way to employ 
the 3rd Law of Behavior Change. They make it easier to sleep well, eat 
healthy, be productive, save money, and generally live better. 

ONETIME ACTIONS THAT LOCK IN GOOD HABITS 


Nutrition 


Buy a water filter to clean your drinking water. 
Use smaller plates to reduce caloric intake. 


Sleep 


Buy a good mattress. 

Get blackout curtains. 

Remove your television from your bedroom. 


Productivity 


Unsubscribe from emails. 

Turn off notifications and mute group chats. 

Set your phone to silent. 

Use email filters to clear up your inbox. 

Delete games and social media apps on your phone. 


Happiness 


Get a dog. 

Move to a friendly, social neighborhood. 


General Health 


Get vaccinated. 

Buy good shoes to avoid back pain. 

Buy a supportive chair or standing desk. 


Finance 


Enroll in an automatic savings plan. 

Set up automatic bill pay. 

Cut cable service. 

Ask service providers to lower your bills. 

Of course, there are many ways to automate good habits and 
eliminate bad ones. Typically, they involve putting technology to work 
for you. Technology can transform actions that were once hard, 
annoying, and complicated into behaviors that are easy, painless, and 
simple. It is the most reliable and effective way to guarantee the right 
behavior. 






















This is particularly useful for behaviors that happen too 
infrequently to become habitual. Things you have to do monthly or 
yearly—like rebalancing your investment portfolio—are never repeated 
frequently enough to become a habit, so they benefit in particular from 
technology “remembering” to do them for you. 

Other examples include: 

■ Medicine: Prescriptions can be automatically refilled. 

■ Personal finance: Employees can save for retirement with an 
automatic wage deduction. 

■ Cooking: Meal-delivery services can do your grocery shopping. 

■ Productivity: Social media browsing can be cut off with a website 
blocker. 

When you automate as much of your life as possible, you can spend 
your effort on the tasks machines cannot do yet. Each habit that we 
hand over to the authority of technology frees up time and energy to 
pour into the next stage of growth. As mathematician and philosopher 
Alfred North Whitehead wrote, “Civilization advances by extending the 
number of operations we can perform without thinking about them.” 

Of course, the power of technology can work against us as well. 
Binge-watching becomes a habit because you have to put more effort in 
to stop looking at the screen than to continue doing so. Instead of 
pressing a button to advance to the next episode, Netflix or YouTube 
will autoplay it for you. All you have to do is keep your eyes open. 

Technology creates a level of convenience that enables you to act on 
your smallest whims and desires. At the mere suggestion of hunger, 
you can have food delivered to your door. At the slightest hint of 
boredom, you can get lost in the vast expanse of social media. When 
the effort required to act on your desires becomes effectively zero, you 
can find yourself slipping into whatever impulse arises at the moment. 
The downside of automation is that we can find ourselves jumping 
from easy task to easy task without making time for more difficult, but 
ultimately more rewarding, work. 

I often find myself gravitating toward social media during any 
downtime. If I feel bored for just a fraction of a second, I reach for my 
phone. It’s easy to write off these minor distractions as “just taking a 



break,” but over time they can accumulate into a serious issue. The 
constant tug of “just one more minute” can prevent me from doing 
anything of consequence. (I’m not the only one. The average person 
spends over two hours per day on social media. What could you do 
with an extra six hundred hours per year?) 

During the year I was writing this book, I experimented with a new 
time management strategy. Every Monday, my assistant would reset 
the passwords on all my social media accounts, which logged me out 
on each device. All week I worked without distraction. On Friday, she 
would send me the new passwords. I had the entire weekend to enjoy 
what social media had to offer until Monday morning when she would 
do it again. (If you don’t have an assistant, team up with a friend or 
family member and reset each other’s passwords each week.) 

One of the biggest surprises was how quickly I adapted. Within the 
first week of locking myself out of social media, I realized that I didn’t 
need to check it nearly as often as I had been, and I certainly didn’t 
need it each day. It had simply been so easy that it had become the 
default. Once my bad habit became impossible, I discovered that I did 
actually have the motivation to work on more meaningful tasks. After I 
removed the mental candy from my environment, it became much 
easier to eat the healthy stuff. 

When working in your favor, automation can make your good habits 
inevitable and your bad habits impossible. It is the ultimate way to lock 
in future behavior rather than relying on willpower in the moment. By 
utilizing commitment devices, strategic onetime decisions, and 
technology, you can create an environment of inevitability—a space 
where good habits are not just an outcome you hope for but an 
outcome that is virtually guaranteed. 

Chapter Summary 

■ The inversion of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change is make it 
difficult. 

■ A commitment device is a choice you make in the present that 
locks in better behavior in the future. 

■ The ultimate way to lock in future behavior is to automate your 
habits. 



■ Onetime choices—like buying a better mattress or enrolling in an 
automatic savings plan—are single actions that automate your 
future habits and deliver increasing returns over time. 

■ Using technology to automate your habits is the most reliable and 
effective way to guarantee the right behavior. 

HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT 


The 1st Law: Make It Obvious 


1.1: Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them. 
1.2: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].” 

1.3: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].” 

1.4: Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible. 


The 2nd Law: Make It Attractive 


2.1: Use temptation bundling. Pair an action you want to do with an action you need to do. 
2.2: Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior. 

2.3: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit. 


The 3rd Law: Make It Easy 


3.1: Reduce friction. Decrease the number of steps between you and your good habits. 

3.2: Prime the environment. Prepare your environment to make future actions easier. 

3.3: Master the decisive moment. Optimize the small choices that deliver outsized impact. 

3.4: Use the Two-Minute Rule. Downscale your habits until they can be done in two minutes 
or less. 

3.5: Automate your habits. Invest in technology and onetime purchases that lock in future 
behavior. 


The 4th Law: Make It Satisfying 


HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT 


Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible 


1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment. 


Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive 


2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits. 


Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult 


3.6: Increase friction. Increase the number of steps between you and your bad habits. 
3.7: Use a commitment device. Restrict your future choices to the ones that benefit you. 


Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying 


You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: 
atomichabits.com/cheatsheet 





























THE 4TH LAW 


Make It Satisfying 


15 


The Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change 

I N THE LATE 1990S, a public health worker named Stephen Luby left his 
hometown of Omaha, Nebraska, and bought a one-way ticket to 
Karachi, Pakistan, 

Karachi was one of the most populous cities in the world. By 1998, 
over nine million people called it home. It was the economic center of 
Pakistan and a transportation hub, with some of the most active 
airports and seaports in the region. In the commercial parts of town, 
you could find all of the standard urban amenities and bustling 
downtown streets. But Karachi was also one of the least livable cities in 
the world. 

Over 60 percent of Karachi’s residents lived in squatter settlements 
and slums. These densely packed neighborhoods were filled with 
makeshift houses cobbled together from old boards, cinder blocks, and 
other discarded materials. There was no waste removal system, no 
electricity grid, no clean water supply. When dry, the streets were a 
combination of dust and trash. When wet, they became a muddy pit of 
sewage. Mosquito colonies thrived in pools of stagnant water, and 
children played among the garbage. 

The unsanitary conditions lead to widespread illness and disease. 
Contaminated water sources caused epidemics of diarrhea, vomiting, 
and abdominal pain. Nearly one third of the children living there were 
malnourished. With so many people crammed into such a small space, 
viruses and bacterial infections spread rapidly. It was this public health 
crisis that had brought Stephen Luby to Pakistan, 

Luby and his team realized that in an environment with poor 
sanitation, the simple habit of washing your hands could make a real 


difference in the health of the residents. But they soon discovered that 
many people were already aware that handwashing was important. 

And yet, despite this knowledge, many residents were washing their 
hands in a haphazard fashion. Some people would just run their hands 
under the water quickly. Others would only wash one hand. Many 
would simply forget to wash their hands before preparing food. 
Everyone said handwashing was important, but few people made a 
habit out of it. The problem wasn’t knowledge. The problem was 
consistency. 

That was when Luby and his team partnered with Procter & Gamble 
to supply the neighborhood with Safeguard soap. Compared to your 
standard bar of soap, using Safeguard was a more enjoyable 
experience. 

“In Pakistan, Safeguard was a premium soap,” Luby told me. “The 
study participants commonly mentioned how much they liked it,” The 
soap foamed easily, and people were able to lather their hands with 
suds. It smelled great. Instantly, handwashing became slightly more 
pleasurable. 

“I see the goal of handwashing promotion not as behavior change 
but as habit adoption,” Luby said. “It is a lot easier for people to adopt 
a product that provides a strong positive sensory signal, for example 
the mint taste of toothpaste, than it is to adopt a habit that does not 
provide pleasurable sensory feedback, like flossing one’s teeth. The 
marketing team at Procter & Gamble talked about trying to create a 
positive handwashing experience.” 

Within months, the researchers saw a rapid shift in the health of 
children in the neighborhood. The rate of diarrhea fell by 52 percent; 
pneumonia by 48 percent; and impetigo, a bacterial skin infection, by 
35 percent. 

The long-term effects were even better. “We went back to some of 
the households in Karachi six years after,” Luby told me. “Over 95 
percent of households who had been given the soap for free and 
encouraged to wash their hands had a handwashing station with soap 
and water available when our study team visited.... We had not given 
any soap to the intervention group for over five years, but during the 
trial they had become so habituated to wash their hands, that they had 



maintained the practice.” It was a powerful example of the fourth and 
final Law of Behavior Change: make it satisfying. 

We are more likely to repeat a behavior when the experience is 
satisfying. This is entirely logical. Feelings of pleasure—even minor 
ones like washing your hands with soap that smells nice and lathers 
well—are signals that tell the brain: “This feels good. Do this again, 
next time.” Pleasure teaches your brain that a behavior is worth 
remembering and repeating. 

Take the story of chewing gum. Chewing gum had been sold 
commercially throughout the 1800s, but it wasn’t until Wrigley 
launched in 1891 that it became a worldwide habit. Early versions were 
made from relatively bland resins—chewy, but not tasty. Wrigley 
revolutionized the industry by adding flavors like Spearmint and Juicy 
Fruit, which made the product fiavorful and fun to use. Then they went 
a step further and began pushing chewing gum as a pathway to a clean 
mouth. Advertisements told readers to “Refresh Your Taste,” 

Tasty flavors and the feeling of a fresh mouth provided little bits of 
immediate reinforcement and made the product satisfying to use. 
Consumption skyrocketed, and Wrigley became the largest chewing 
gum company in the world. 

Toothpaste had a similar trajectory. Manufacturers enjoyed great 
success when they added flavors like spearmint, peppermint, and 
cinnamon to their products. These flavors don’t improve the 
effectiveness of toothpaste. They simply create a “clean mouth” feel 
and make the experience of brushing your teeth more pleasurable. My 
wife actually stopped using Sensodyne because she didn’t like the 
aftertaste. She switched to a brand with a stronger mint flavor, which 
proved to be more satisfying. 

Conversely, if an experience is not satisfying, we have little reason to 
repeat it. In my research, I came across the story of a woman who had 
a narcissistic relative who drove her nuts. In an attempt to spend less 
time with this egomaniac, she acted as dull and as boring as possible 
whenever he was around. Within a few encounters, he started avoiding 
her because he found her so uninteresting. 

Stories like these are evidence of the Cardinal Rule of Behavior 
Change: What is rewarded is repeated. What is punished is avoided. 
You learn what to do in the future based on what you were rewarded 



for doing (or punished for doing) in the past. Positive emotions 
cultivate habits. Negative emotions destroy them. 

The first three laws of behavior change—maA:e it obvious, make it 
attractive, and make it easy—increase the odds that a behavior will be 
performed this time. The fourth law of behavior change—ma/ce it 
satisfying—increases the odds that a behavior will be repeated next 
time. It completes the habit loop. 

But there is a trick. We are not looking for just any type of 
satisfaction. We are looking for immediate satisfaction. 


THE MISMATCH BETWEEN IMMEDIATE AND DELAYED 

REWARDS 

Imagine you’re an animal roaming the plains of Africa—a giraffe or an 
elephant or a lion. On any given day, most of your decisions have an 
immediate impact. You are always thinking about what to eat or where 
to sleep or how to avoid a predator. You are constantly focused on the 
present or the very near future. You live in what scientists call an 
immediate-return environment because your actions instantly deliver 
clear and immediate outcomes. 

Now switch back to your human self. In modern society, many of 
the choices you make today will not benefit you immediately. If you do 
a good job at work, you’ll get a paycheck in a few weeks. If you exercise 
today, perhaps you won’t be overweight next year. If you save money 
now, maybe you’ll have enough for retirement decades from now. You 
live in what scientists call a delayed-return environment because you 
can work for years before your actions deliver the intended payoff. 

The human brain did not evolve for life in a delayed-return 
environment. The earliest remains of modern humans, known as 
Homo sapiens sapiens, are approximately two hundred thousand years 
old. These were the first humans to have a brain relatively similar to 
ours. In particular, the neocortex—the newest part of the brain and the 
region responsible for higher functions like language—was roughly the 
same size two hundred thousand years ago as today. You are walking 
around with the same hardware as your Paleolithic ancestors. 

It is only recently—during the last five hundred years or so—that 
society has shifted to a predominantly delayed-return environment.* 


Compared to the age of the brain, modern society is brand-new. In the 
last one hundred years, we have seen the rise of the car, the airplane, 
the television, the personal computer, the internet, the smartphone, 
and Beyonce. The world has changed much in recent years, but human 
nature has changed little. 

Similar to other animals on the African savannah, our ancestors 
spent their days responding to grave threats, securing the next meal, 
and taking shelter from a storm. It made sense to place a high value on 
instant gratification. The distant future was less of a concern. And after 
thousands of generations in an immediate-return environment, our 
brains evolved to prefer quick payoffs to long-term ones. 

Behavioral economists refer to this tendency as time inconsistency. 
That is, the way your brain evaluates rewards is inconsistent across 
time.* You value the present more than the future. Usually, this 
tendency serves us well. A reward that is certain right now is typically 
worth more than one that is merely posszh/e in the future. But 
occasionally, our bias toward instant gratification causes problems. 

Why would someone smoke if they know it increases the risk of lung 
cancer? Why would someone overeat when they know it increases their 
risk of obesity? Why would someone have unsafe sex if they know it 
can result in sexually transmitted disease? Once you understand how 
the brain prioritizes rewards, the answers become clear: the 
consequences of bad habits are delayed while the rewards are 
immediate. Smoking might kill you in ten years, but it reduces stress 
and eases your nicotine cravings now. Overeating is harmful in the 
long run but appetizing in the moment. Sex—safe or not—provides 
pleasure right away. Disease and infection won’t show up for days or 
weeks, even years. 

Every habit produces multiple outcomes across time. Unfortunately, 
these outcomes are often misaligned. With our bad habits, the 
immediate outcome usually feels good, but the ultimate outcome feels 
bad. With good habits, it is the reverse: the immediate outcome is 
unenjoyable, but the ultimate outcome feels good. The French 
economist Frederic Bastiat explained the problem clearly when he 
wrote, “It almost always happens that when the immediate 
consequence is favorable, the later consequences are disastrous, and 
vice versa.... Often, the sweeter the first fruit of a habit, the more 
bitter are its later fruits.” 


Put another way, the costs of your good habits are in the present. 
The costs of your bad habits are in the future. 

The brain’s tendency to prioritize the present moment means you 
can’t rely on good intentions. When you make a plan—to lose weight, 
write a book, or learn a language—you are actually making plans for 
your future self. And when you envision what you want your life to be 
like, it is easy to see the value in taking actions with long-term benefits. 
We all want better lives for our future selves. However, when the 
moment of decision arrives, instant gratification usually wins. You are 
no longer making a choice for Future You, who dreams of being fitter 
or wealthier or happier. You are choosing for Present You, who wants 
to be full, pampered, and entertained. As a general rule, the more 
immediate pleasure you get from an action, the more strongly you 
should question whether it aligns with your long-term goals.* 

With a fuller understanding of what causes our brain to repeat some 
behaviors and avoid others, let’s update the Cardinal Rule of Behavior 
Change: What is immediately rewarded is repeated. What is 
immediately punished is avoided. 

Our preference for instant gratification reveals an important truth 
about success: because of how we are wired, most people will spend all 
day chasing quick hits of satisfaction. The road less traveled is the road 
of delayed gratification. If you’re willing to wait for the rewards, you’ll 
face less competition and often get a bigger payoff. As the saying goes, 
the last mile is always the least crowded. 

This is precisely what research has shown. People who are better at 
delaying gratification have higher SAT scores, lower levels of substance 
abuse, lower likelihood of obesity, better responses to stress, and 
superior social skills. We’ve all seen this play out in our own lives. If 
you delay watching television and get your homework done, you’ll 
generally learn more and get better grades. If you don’t buy desserts 
and chips at the store, you’ll often eat healthier food when you get 
home. At some point, success in nearly every field requires you to 
ignore an immediate reward in favor of a delayed reward. 

Here’s the problem: most people know that delaying gratification is 
the wise approach. They want the benefits of good habits: to be 
healthy, productive, at peace. But these outcomes are seldom top-of- 
mind at the decisive moment. Thankfully, it’s possible to train yourself 
to delay gratification—but you need to work with the grain of human 


nature, not against it. The best way to do this is to add a little bit of 
immediate pleasure to the habits that pay off in the long-run and a 
little bit of immediate pain to ones that don’t. 


HOW TO TURN INSTANT GRATIFICATION TO YOUR ADVANTAGE 

The vital thing in getting a habit to stick is to feel successful—even if 
it’s in a small way. The feeling of success is a signal that your habit paid 
off and that the work was worth the effort. 

In a perfect world, the reward for a good habit is the habit itself. In 
the real world, good habits tend to feel worthwhile only after they have 
provided you with something. Early on, it’s all sacrifice. You’ve gone to 
the gym a few times, but you’re not stronger or fitter or faster—at least, 
not in any noticeable sense. It’s only months later, once you shed a few 
pounds or your arms gain some definition, that it becomes easier to 
exercise for its own sake. In the beginning, you need a reason to stay 
on track. This is why immediate rewards are essential. They keep you 
excited while the delayed rewards accumulate in the background. 

What we’re really talking about here—when we’re discussing 
immediate rewards—is the ending of a behavior. The ending of any 
experience is vital because we tend to remember it more than other 
phases. You want the ending of your habit to be satisfying. The best 
approach is to use reinforcement, which refers to the process of using 
an immediate reward to increase the rate of a behavior. Habit stacking, 
which we covered in Chapter 5, ties your habit to an immediate cue, 
which makes it obvious when to start. Reinforcement ties your habit to 
an immediate reward, which makes it satisfying when you finish. 

Immediate reinforcement can be especially helpful when dealing 
with habits of avoidance, which are behaviors you want to stop doing. 
It can be challenging to stick with habits like “no frivolous purchases” 
or “no alcohol this month” because nothing happens when you skip 
happy hour drinks or don’t buy that pair of shoes. It can be hard to feel 
satisfied when there is no action in the first place. All you’re doing is 
resisting temptation, and there isn’t much satisfying about that. 

One solution is to turn the situation on its head. You want to make 
avoidance visible. Open a savings account and label it for something 
you want—maybe “Leather Jacket.” Whenever you pass on a purchase, 
put the same amount of money in the account. Skip your morning 



latte? Transfer $5, Pass on another month of Netflix? Move $10 over. 
It’s like creating a loyalty program for yourself. The immediate reward 
of seeing yourself save money toward the leather jacket feels a lot 
better than being deprived. You are making it satisfying to do nothing. 

One of my readers and his wife used a similar setup. They wanted to 
stop eating out so much and start cooking together more. They labeled 
their savings account “Trip to Europe.” Whenever they skipped going 
out to eat, they transferred $50 into the account. At the end of the year, 
they put the money toward the vacation. 

It is worth noting that it is important to select short-term rewards 
that reinforce your identity rather than ones that conflict with it. 
Buying a new jacket is fine if you’re trying to lose weight or read more 
books, but it doesn’t work if you’re trying to budget and save money. 
Instead, taking a bubble bath or going on a leisurely walk are good 
examples of rewarding yourself with free time, which aligns with your 
ultimate goal of more freedom and financial independence. Similarly, 
if your reward for exercising is eating a bowl of ice cream, then you’re 
casting votes for conflicting identities, and it ends up being a wash. 
Instead, maybe your reward is a massage, which is both a luxury and a 
vote toward taking care of your body. Now the short-term reward is 
aligned with your long-term vision of being a healthy person. 

Eventually, as intrinsic rewards like a better mood, more energy, 
and reduced stress kick in, you’ll become less concerned with chasing 
the secondary reward. The identity itself becomes the reinforcer. You 
do it because it’s who you are and it feels good to be you. The more a 
habit becomes part of your life, the less you need outside 
encouragement to follow through. Incentives can start a habit. Identity 
sustains a habit. 

That said, it takes time for the evidence to accumulate and a new 
identity to emerge. Immediate reinforcement helps maintain 
motivation in the short term while you’re waiting for the long-term 
rewards to arrive. 

In summary, a habit needs to be enjoyable for it to last. Simple bits 
of reinforcement—like soap that smells great or toothpaste that has a 
refreshing mint flavor or seeing $50 hit your savings account—can 
offer the immediate pleasure you need to enjoy a habit. And change is 
easy when it is enjoyable. 



Chapter Summary 

■ The 4th Law of Behavior Change is make it satisfying. 

■ We are more likely to repeat a behavior when the experience is 
satisfying, 

■ The human brain evolved to prioritize immediate rewards over 
delayed rewards. 

■ The Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What is immediately 
rewarded is repeated. What is immediately punished is avoided. 

■ To get a habit to stick you need to feel immediately successful- 
even if it’s in a small way, 

■ The first three laws of behavior change—make it obvious, make it 
attractive, and make it easy—increase the odds that a behavior 
will be performed this time. The fourth law of behavior change 
—make it satisfying—increases the odds that a behavior will be 
repeated next time. 



16 


How to Stick with Good Habits Every Day 

I N 1993, a bank in Abbotsford, Canada, hired a twenty-three-year-old 
stockbroker named Trent Dyrsmid, Abbotsford was a relatively small 
suburb, tucked away in the shadow of nearby Vancouver, where most 
of the big business deals were being made. Given the location, and the 
fact that Dyrsmid was a rookie, nobody expected too much of him. But 
he made brisk progress thanks to a simple daily habit. 

Dyrsmid began each morning with two jars on his desk. One was 
filled with 120 paper clips. The other was empty. As soon as he settled 
in each day, he would make a sales call. Immediately after, he would 
move one paper clip from the full jar to the empty jar and the process 
would begin again. “Every morning I would start with 120 paper clips 
in one jar and I would keep dialing the phone until I had moved them 
all to the second jar,” he told me. 

Within eighteen months, Dyrsmid was bringing in $5 million to the 
firm. By age twenty-four, he was making $75,000 per year—the 
equivalent of $125,000 today. Not long after, he landed a six-figure job 
with another company. 

I like to refer to this technique as the Paper Clip Strategy and, over 
the years. I’ve heard from readers who have employed it in a variety of 
ways. One woman shifted a hairpin from one container to another 
whenever she wrote a page of her book. Another man moved a marble 
from one bin to the next after each set of push-ups. 

Making progress is satisfying, and visual measures—like moving 
paper clips or hairpins or marbles—provide clear evidence of your 
progress. As a result, they reinforce your behavior and add a little bit of 
immediate satisfaction to any activity. Visual measurement comes in 


many forms: food journals, workout logs, loyalty punch cards, the 
progress bar on a software download, even the page numbers in a 
book. But perhaps the best way to measure your progress is with a 
habit tracker. 


HOW TO KEEP YOUR HABITS ON TRACK 

A habit tracker is a simple way to measure whether you did a habit. 

The most basic format is to get a calendar and cross off each day you 
stick with your routine. For example, if you meditate on Monday, 
Wednesday, and Friday, each of those dates gets an X. As time rolls by, 
the calendar becomes a record of your habit streak. 

Countless people have tracked their habits, but perhaps the most 
famous was Benjamin Franklin, Beginning at age twenty, Franklin 
carried a small booklet everywhere he went and used it to track 
thirteen personal virtues. This list included goals like “Lose no time. Be 
always employed in something useful” and “Avoid trifling 
conversation.” At the end of each day, Franklin would open his booklet 
and record his progress. 

Jerry Seinfeld reportedly uses a habit tracker to stick with his streak 
of writing jokes. In the documentary Comedian, he explains that his 
goal is simply to “never break the chain” of writing jokes every day. In 
other words, he is not focused on how good or bad a particular joke is 
or how inspired he feels. He is simply focused on showing up and 
adding to his streak, 

“Don’t break the chain” is a powerful mantra. Don’t break the chain 
of sales calls and you’ll build a successful book of business. Don’t break 
the chain of workouts and you’ll get fit faster than you’d expect. Don’t 
break the chain of creating every day and you will end up with an 
impressive portfolio. Habit tracking is powerful because it leverages 
multiple Laws of Behavior Change. It simultaneously makes a behavior 
obvious, attractive, and satisfying. 

Let’s break down each one. 


Benefit #1: Habit tracking is obvious. 



Recording your last action creates a trigger that can initiate your next 
one. Habit tracking naturally builds a series of visual cues like the 
streak of ^s on your calendar or the list of meals in your food log. 
When you look at the calendar and see your streak, you’ll be reminded 
to act again. Research has shown that people who track their progress 
on goals like losing weight, quitting smoking, and lowering blood 
pressure are all more likely to improve than those who don’t. One 
study of more than sixteen hundred people found that those who kept 
a daily food log lost twice as much weight as those who did not. The 
mere act of tracking a behavior can spark the urge to change it. 

Habit tracking also keeps you honest. Most of us have a distorted 
view of our own behavior. We think we act better than we do. 
Measurement offers one way to overcome our blindness to our own 
behavior and notice what’s really going on each day. One glance at the 
paper clips in the container and you immediately know how much 
work you have (or haven’t) been putting in. When the evidence is right 
in front of you, you’re less likely to lie to yourself. 


Benefit #2: Habit tracking is attractive. 

The most effective form of motivation is progress. When we get a 
signal that we are moving forward, we become more motivated to 
continue down that path. In this way, habit tracking can have an 
addictive effect on motivation. Each small win feeds your desire. 

This can be particularly powerful on a bad day. When you’re feeling 
down, it’s easy to forget about all the progress you have already made. 
Habit tracking provides visual proof of your hard work—a subtle 
reminder of how far you’ve come. Plus, the empty square you see each 
morning can motivate you to get started because you don’t want to lose 
your progress by breaking the streak. 


Benefit #3: Habit tracking is satisfying. 

This is the most crucial benefit of all. Tracking can become its own 
form of reward. It is satisfying to cross an item off your to-do list, to 
complete an entry in your workout log, or to mark an X on the 
calendar. It feels good to watch your results grow—the size of your 



investment portfolio, the length of your book manuscript—and if it 
feels good, then you’re more likely to endure. 

Habit tracking also helps keep your eye on the ball: you’re focused 
on the process rather than the result. You’re not fixated on getting six- 
pack abs, you’re just trying to keep the streak alive and become the 
type of person who doesn’t miss workouts. 

In summary, habit tracking (i) creates a visual cue that can remind 
you to act, (2) is inherently motivating because you see the progress 
you are making and don’t want to lose it, and (3) feels satisfying 
whenever you record another successful instance of your habit. 
Furthermore, habit tracking provides visual proof that you are casting 
votes for the type of person you wish to become, which is a delightful 
form of immediate and intrinsic gratification.* 

You may be wondering, if habit tracking is so useful, why have I 
waited so long to talk about it? 

Despite all the benefits. I’ve left this discussion until now for a 
simple reason: many people resist the idea of tracking and measuring. 
It can feel like a burden because it forces you into two habits: the habit 
you’re trying to build and the habit of tracking it. Counting calories 
sounds like a hassle when you’re already struggling to follow a diet. 
Writing down every sales call seems tedious when you’ve got work to 
do. It feels easier to say, “I’ll just eat less.” Or, “I’ll try harder.” Or, “I’ll 
remember to do it.” People inevitably tell me things like, “I have a 
decision journal, but I wish I used it more.” Or, “I recorded my 
workouts for a week, but then quit.” I’ve been there myself. I once 
made a food log to track my calories. I managed to do it for one meal 
and then gave up. 

Tracking isn’t for everyone, and there is no need to measure your 
entire life. But nearly anyone can benefit from it in some form—even if 
it’s only temporary. 

What can we do to make tracking easier? 

First, whenever possible, measurement should be automated. You’ll 
probably be surprised by how much you’re already tracking without 
knowing it. Your credit card statement tracks how often you go out to 
eat. Your Fitbit registers how many steps you take and how long you 
sleep. Your calendar records how many new places you travel to each 
year. Once you know where to get the data, add a note to your calendar 


to review it each week or each month, which is more practical than 
tracking it every day. 

Second, manual tracking should be limited to your most important 
habits. It is better to consistently track one habit than to sporadically 
track ten. 

Finally, record each measurement immediately after the habit 
occurs. The completion of the behavior is the cue to write it down. This 
approach allows you to combine the habit-stacking method mentioned 
in Chapter 5 with habit tracking. 

The habit stacking + habit tracking formula is: 

After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [TRACK MY HABIT]. 

■ After I hang up the phone from a sales call, I will move one paper 
clip over. 

■ After I finish each set at the gym, I will record it in my workout 
journal. 

■ After I put my plate in the dishwasher, I will write down what I 
ate. 

These tactics can make tracking your habits easier. Even if you 
aren’t the type of person who enjoys recording your behavior, I think 
you’ll find a few weeks of measurements to be insightful. It’s always 
interesting to see how you’ve actually been spending your time. 

That said, every habit streak ends at some point. And, more 
important than any single measurement, is having a good plan for 
when your habits slide off track. 


HOW TO RECOVER QUICKLY WHEN YOUR HABITS BREAK 

DOWN 

No matter how consistent you are with your habits, it is inevitable that 
life will interrupt you at some point. Perfection is not possible. Before 
long, an emergency will pop up—you get sick or you have to travel for 
work or your family needs a little more of your time. 

Whenever this happens to me, I try to remind myself of a simple 
rule: never miss twice. 



If I miss one day, I try to get back into it as quickly as possible. 
Missing one workout happens, but I’m not going to miss two in a row. 
Maybe I’ll eat an entire pizza, but I’ll follow it up with a healthy meal. I 
can’t be perfect, but I can avoid a second lapse. As soon as one streak 
ends, I get started on the next one. 

The first mistake is never the one that ruins you. It is the spiral of 
repeated mistakes that follows. Missing once is an accident. Missing 
twice is the start of a new habit. 

This is a distinguishing feature between winners and losers. Anyone 
can have a bad performance, a bad workout, or a bad day at work. But 
when successful people fail, they rebound quickly. The breaking of a 
habit doesn’t matter if the reclaiming of it is fast. 

I think this principle is so important that I’ll stick to it even if I can’t 
do a habit as well or as completely as I would like. Too often, we fall 
into an all-or-nothing cycle with our habits. The problem is not 
slipping up; the problem is thinking that if you can’t do something 
perfectly, then you shouldn’t do it at all. 

You don’t realize how valuable it is to just show up on your bad (or 
busy) days. Lost days hurt you more than successful days help you. If 
you start with $100, then a 50 percent gain will take you to $150. But 
you only need a 33 percent loss to take you back to $100. In other 
words, avoiding a 33 percent loss is just as valuable as achieving a 50 
percent gain. As Charlie Munger says, “The first rule of compounding: 
Never interrupt it unnecessarily,” 

This is why the “bad” workouts are often the most important ones. 
Sluggish days and bad workouts maintain the compound gains you 
accrued from previous good days. Simply doing something—ten 
squats, five sprints, a push-up, anything really—is huge. Don’t put up a 
zero. Don’t let losses eat into your compounding. 

Furthermore, it’s not always about what happens during the 
workout. It’s about being the type of person who doesn’t miss 
workouts. It’s easy to train when you feel good, but it’s crucial to show 
up when you don’t feel like it—even if you do less than you hope. Going 
to the gym for five minutes may not improve your performance, but it 
reaffirms your identity. 

The all-or-nothing cycle of behavior change is just one pitfall that 
can derail your habits. Another potential danger—especially if you are 



using a habit tracker—is measuring the wrong thing. 


KNOWING WHEN (AND WHEN NOT) TO TRACK A HABIT 

Say you’re running a restaurant and you want to know if your chef is 
doing a good job. One way to measure success is to track how many 
customers pay for a meal each day. If more customers come in, the 
food must be good. If fewer customers come in, something must be 
wrong. 

However, this one measurement—daily revenue—only gives a 
limited picture of what’s really going on. Just because someone pays 
for a meal doesn’t mean they enjoy the meal. Even dissatisfied 
customers are unlikely to dine and dash. In fact, if you’re only 
measuring revenue, the food might be getting worse but you’re making 
up for it with marketing or discounts or some other method. Instead, it 
may be more effective to track how many customers/inish their meal 
or perhaps the percentage of customers who leave a generous tip. 

The dark side of tracking a particular behavior is that we become 
driven by the number rather than the purpose behind it. If your 
success is measured by quarterly earnings, you will optimize sales, 
revenue, and accounting for quarterly earnings. If your success is 
measured by a lower number on the scale, you will optimize for a lower 
number on the scale, even if that means embracing crash diets, juice 
cleanses, and fat-loss pills. The human mind wants to “win” whatever 
game is being played. 

This pitfall is evident in many areas of life. We focus on working 
long hours instead of getting meaningful work done. We care more 
about getting ten thousand steps than we do about being healthy. We 
teach for standardized tests instead of emphasizing learning, curiosity, 
and critical thinking. In short, we optimize for what we measure. When 
we choose the wrong measurement, we get the wrong behavior. 

This is sometimes referred to as Goodhart’s Law. Named after the 
economist Charles Goodhart, the principle states, “When a measure 
becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure.” Measurement is only 
useful when it guides you and adds context to a larger picture, not 
when it consumes you. Each number is simply one piece of feedback in 
the overall system. 



In our data-driven world, we tend to overvalue numbers and 
undervalue anything ephemeral, soft, and difficult to quantify. We 
mistakenly think the factors we can measure are the only factors that 
exist. But just because you can measure something doesn’t mean it’s 
the most important thing. And just because you can’t measure 
something doesn’t mean it’s not important at all. 

All of this to say, it’s crucial to keep habit tracking in its proper 
place. It can feel satisfying to record a habit and track your progress, 
but the measurement is not the only thing that matters. Furthermore, 
there are many ways to measure progress, and sometimes it helps to 
shift your focus to something entirely different. 

This is why nonscale victories can be effective for weight loss. The 
number on the scale may be stubborn, so if you focus solely on that 
number, your motivation will sag. But you may notice that your skin 
looks better or you wake up earlier or your sex drive got a boost. All of 
these are valid ways to track your improvement. If you’re not feeling 
motivated by the number on the scale, perhaps it’s time to focus on a 
different measurement—one that gives you more signals of progress. 

No matter how you measure your improvement, habit tracking 
offers a simple way to make your habits more satisfying. Each 
measurement provides a little bit of evidence that you’re moving in the 
right direction and a brief moment of immediate pleasure for a job well 
done. 

Chapter Summary 

■ One of the most satisfying feelings is the feeling of making 
progress. 

■ A habit tracker is a simple way to measure whether you did a 
habit—like marking an X on a calendar. 

■ Habit trackers and other visual forms of measurement can make 
your habits satisfying by providing clear evidence of your 
progress. 

■ Don’t break the chain. Try to keep your habit streak alive. 

■ Never miss twice. If you miss one day, try to get back on track as 
quickly as possible. 



Just because you can measure something doesn’t mean it’s the 
most important thing. 



17 


How an Accountability Partner Can 
Change Everything 

A fter SERVING AS a pilot in World War II, Roger Fisher attended 
Harvard Law School and spent thirty-four years specializing in 
negotiation and conflict management. He founded the Harvard 
Negotiation Project and worked with numerous countries and world 
leaders on peace resolutions, hostage crises, and diplomatic 
compromises. But it was in the 1970s and 1980s, as the threat of 
nuclear war escalated, that Fisher developed perhaps his most 
interesting idea. 

At the time, Fisher was focused on designing strategies that could 
prevent nuclear war, and he had noticed a troubling fact. Any sitting 
president would have access to launch codes that could kill millions of 
people but would never actually see anyone die because he would 
always be thousands of miles away. 

“My suggestion was quite simple,” he wrote in 1981. “Put that 
[nuclear] code number in a little capsule, and then implant that 
capsule right next to the heart of a volunteer. The volunteer would 
carry with him a big, heavy butcher knife as he accompanied the 
President. If ever the President wanted to fire nuclear weapons, the 
only way he could do so would be for him first, with his own hands, to 
kill one human being. The President says, ‘George, I’m sorry but tens 
of millions must die.’ He has to look at someone and realize what death 
is—what an innocent death is. Blood on the White House carpet. It’s 
reality brought home. 


“When I suggested this to friends in the Pentagon they said, ‘My 
God, that’s terrible. Having to kill someone would distort the 
President’s judgment. He might never push the button.’” 

Throughout our discussion of the 4th Law of Behavior Change we 
have covered the importance of making good habits immediately 
satisfying. Fisher’s proposal is an inversion of the 4th Law: Make it 
immediately unsatisfying. 

Just as we are more likely to repeat an experience when the ending 
is satisfying, we are also more likely to avoid an experience when the 
ending is painful. Pain is an effective teacher. If a failure is painful, it 
gets fixed. If a failure is relatively painless, it gets ignored. The more 
immediate and more costly a mistake is, the faster you will learn from 
it. The threat of a bad review forces a plumber to be good at his job. 

The possibility of a customer never returning makes restaurants create 
good food. The cost of cutting the wrong blood vessel makes a surgeon 
master human anatomy and cut carefully. When the consequences are 
severe, people learn quickly. 

The more immediate the pain, the less likely the behavior. If you 
want to prevent bad habits and eliminate unhealthy behaviors, then 
adding an instant cost to the action is a great way to reduce their odds. 

We repeat bad habits because they serve us in some way, and that 
makes them hard to abandon. The best way I know to overcome this 
predicament is to increase the speed of the punishment associated with 
the behavior. There can’t be a gap between the action and the 
consequences. 

As soon as actions incur an immediate consequence, behavior 
begins to change. Customers pay their bills on time when they are 
charged a late fee. Students show up to class when their grade is linked 
to attendance. We’ll jump through a lot of hoops to avoid a little bit of 
immediate pain. 

There is, of course, a limit to this. If you’re going to rely on 
punishment to change behavior, then the strength of the punishment 
must match the relative strength of the behavior it is trying to correct. 
To be productive, the cost of procrastination must be greater than the 
cost of action. To be healthy, the cost of laziness must be greater than 
the cost of exercise. Getting fined for smoking in a restaurant or failing 



to recycle adds consequence to an action. Behavior only shifts if the 
punishment is painful enough and reliably enforced. 

In general, the more local, tangible, concrete, and immediate the 
consequence, the more likely it is to influence individual behavior. The 
more global, intangible, vague, and delayed the consequence, the less 
likely it is to influence individual behavior. 

Thankfully, there is a straightforward way to add an immediate cost 
to any bad habit: create a habit contract. 


THE HABIT CONTRACT 

The first seat belt law was passed in New York on December i, 1984. At 
the time, just 14 percent of people in the United States regularly wore a 
seat belt—but that was all about to change. 

Within five years, over half of the nation had seat belt laws. Today, 
wearing a seat belt is enforceable by law in forty-nine of the fifty states. 
And it’s not just the legislation, the number of people wearing seat 
belts has changed dramatically as well. In 2016, over 88 percent of 
Americans buckled up each time they got in a car. In just over thirty 
years, there was a complete reversal in the habits of millions of people. 

Laws and regulations are an example of how government can 
change our habits by creating a social contract. As a society, we 
collectively agree to abide by certain rules and then enforce them as a 
group. Whenever a new piece of legislation impacts behavior—seat belt 
laws, banning smoking inside restaurants, mandatory recycling—it is 
an example of a social contract shaping our habits. The group agrees to 
act in a certain way, and if you don’t follow along, you’ll be punished. 

Just as governments use laws to hold citizens accountable, you can 
create a habit contract to hold yourself accountable. A habit contract is 
a verbal or written agreement in which you state your commitment to a 
particular habit and the punishment that will occur if you don’t follow 
through. Then you find one or two people to act as your accountability 
partners and sign off on the contract with you. 

Bryan Harris, an entrepreneur from Nashville, Tennessee, was the 
first person I saw put this strategy into action. Shortly after the birth of 
his son, Harris realized he wanted to shed a few pounds. He wrote up a 
habit contract between himself, his wife, and his personal trainer. The 



first version read, “Bryan’s #i objective for Qi of 2017 is to start eating 
correctly again so he feels better, looks better, and is able to hit his 
long-term goal of 200 pounds at 10% body fat.” 

Below that statement, Harris laid out a road map for achieving his 
ideal outcome: 

■ Phase #1: Get back to a strict “slow-carb” diet in Qi, 

■ Phase #2: Start a strict macro nutrient tracking program in Q2, 

■ Phase #3: Refine and maintain the details of his diet and workout 
program in Q3, 

Finally, he wrote out each of the daily habits that would get him to 
his goal. For example, “Write down all food that he consumes each day 
and weigh himself each day.” 

And then he listed the punishment if he failed: “If Bryan doesn’t do 
these two items then the following consequence will be enforced: He 
will have to dress up each workday and each Sunday morning for the 
rest of the quarter. Dress up is defined as not wearing jeans, t-shirts, 
hoodies, or shorts. He will also give Joey (his trainer) $200 to use as 
he sees fit if he misses one day of logging food.” 

At the bottom of the page, Harris, his wife, and his trainer all signed 
the contract. 

My initial reaction was that a contract like this seemed overly 
formal and unnecessary, especially the signatures. But Harris 
convinced me that signing the contract was an indication of 
seriousness. “Anytime I skip this part,” he said, “I start slacking almost 
immediately.” 

Three months later, after hitting his targets for Qi, Harris upgraded 
his goals. The consequences escalated, too. If he missed his 
carbohydrate and protein targets, he had to pay his trainer $100. And 
if he failed to weigh himself, he had to give his wife $500 to use as she 
saw fit. Perhaps most painfully, if he forgot to run sprints, he had to 
dress up for work every day and wear an Alabama hat the rest of the 
quarter—the bitter rival of his beloved Auburn team. 

The strategy worked. With his wife and trainer acting as 
accountability partners and with the habit contract clarifying exactly 



what to do each day, Harris lost the weight.* 

To make bad habits unsatisfying, your best option is to make them 
painful in the moment. Creating a habit contract is a straightforward 
way to do exactly that. 

Even if you don’t want to create a full-blown habit contract, simply 
having an accountability partner is useful. The comedian Margaret Cho 
writes a joke or song every day. She does the “song a day” challenge 
with a friend, which helps them both stay accountable. Knowing that 
someone is watching can be a powerful motivator. You are less likely to 
procrastinate or give up because there is an immediate cost. If you 
don’t follow through, perhaps they’ll see you as untrustworthy or lazy. 
Suddenly, you are not only failing to uphold your promises to yourself, 
but also failing to uphold your promises to others. 

You can even automate this process. Thomas Frank, an 
entrepreneur in Boulder, Colorado, wakes up at 5:55 each morning. 
And if he doesn’t, he has a tweet automatically scheduled that says, 

“It’s 6:10 and I’m not up because I’m lazy! Reply to this for $5 via 
PayPal (limit 5), assuming my alarm didn’t malfunction.” 

We are always trying to present our best selves to the world. We 
comb our hair and brush our teeth and dress ourselves carefully 
because we know these habits are likely to get a positive reaction. We 
want to get good grades and graduate from top schools to impress 
potential employers and mates and our friends and family. We care 
about the opinions of those around us because it helps if others like us. 
This is precisely why getting an accountability partner or signing a 
habit contract can work so well. 

Chapter Summary 

■ The inversion of the 4th Law of Behavior Change is make it 
unsatisfying. 

■ We are less likely to repeat a bad habit if it is painful or 
unsatisfying. 

■ An accountability partner can create an immediate cost to 
inaction. We care deeply about what others think of us, and we do 
not want others to have a lesser opinion of us. 

■ A habit contract can be used to add a social cost to any behavior. 

It makes the costs of violating your promises public and painful. 



Knowing that someone else is watching you can be a powerful 
motivator. 


HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT 


The 1st Law: Make It Obvious 


1.1: Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them. 
1.2: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].” 

1.3: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].” 

1.4: Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible. 


The 2nd Law:Make It Attractive 


2.1: Use temptation bundling. Pair an action you wanf to do with an action you need to do. 
2.2: Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior. 

2.3: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit. 


The 3rd Law: Make It Easy 


3.1: Reduce friction. Decrease the number of steps between you and your good habits. 

3.2: Prime the environment. Prepare your environment to make future actions easier. 

3.3: Master the decisive moment. Optimize the small choices that deliver outsized impact. 

3.4: Use the Two-Minute Rule. Downscale your habits until they can be done in two minutes 
or less. 

3.5: Automate your habits. Invest in technology and onetime purchases that lock in future 
behavior. 


The 4th Law: Make It Satisfying 


4.1: Use reinforcement. Give yourself an immediate reward when you complete your habit. 

4.2: Make “doing nothing” enjoyable. When avoiding a bad habit, design a way to see the 
benefits. 

4.3: Use a habit tracker. Keep track of your habit streak and “don’t break the chain.” 

4.4: Never miss twice. When you forget to do a habit, make sure you get back on track 
immediately. 

HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT 


Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible 


1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment. 


Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive 


2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits. 


Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult 


3.6: Increase friction. Increase the number of steps between you and your bad habits. 
3.7: Use a commitment device. Restrict your future choices to the ones that benefit you. 


Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying 


4.5: Get an accountability partner. Ask someone to watch your behavior. 





























4.6: Create a habit contract. Make the costs of your bad habits public and painful. 


You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: 
atomichabits.com/cheatsheet 






ADVANCED TACTICS 


How to Go from Being Merely Good to 

Being Truly Great 


18 


The Truth About Talent (When Genes 
Matter and When They Don’t) 

M any people are familiar with Michael Phelps, who is widely 

considered to be one of the greatest athletes in history, Phelps has 
won more Olympic medals not only than any swimmer but also more 
than any Olympian in any sport. 

Fewer people know the name Hicham El Guerrouj, but he was a 
fantastic athlete in his own right, El Guerrouj is a Moroccan runner 
who holds two Olympic gold medals and is one of the greatest middle- 
distance runners of all time. For many years, he held the world record 
in the mile, 1,500-meter, and 2,000-meter races. At the Olympic 
Games in Athens, Greece, in 2004, he won gold in the 1,500-meter and 
5,000-meter races. 

These two athletes are wildly different in many ways, (For starters, 
one competed on land and the other in water.) But most notably, they 
differ significantly in height. El Guerrouj is five feet, nine inches tall, 
Phelps is six feet, four inches tall. Despite this seven-inch difference in 
height, the two men are identical in one respect: Michael Phelps and 
Hicham El Guerrouj wear the same length inseam on their pants. 

How is this possible? Phelps has relatively short legs for his height 
and a very long torso, the perfect build for swimming. El Guerrouj has 
incredibly long legs and a short upper body, an ideal frame for distance 
running. 

Now, imagine if these world-class athletes were to switch sports. 
Given his remarkable athleticism, could Michael Phelps become an 
Olympic-caliber distance runner with enough training? It’s unlikely. At 


peak fitness, Phelps weighed 194 pounds, which is 40 percent heavier 
than El Guerrouj, who competed at an ultralight 138 pounds. Taller 
runners are heavier runners, and every extra pound is a curse when it 
comes to distance running. Against elite competition, Phelps would be 
doomed from the start. 

Similarly, El Guerrouj might be one of the best runners in history, 
but it’s doubtful he would ever qualify for the Olympics as a swimmer. 
Since 1976, the average height of Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 
1,500-meter run is five feet, ten inches. In comparison, the average 
height of Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 100-meter freestyle 
swim is six feet, four inches. Swimmers tend to be tall and have long 
backs and arms, which are ideal for pulling through the water. El 
Guerrouj would be at a severe disadvantage before he ever touched the 
pool. 

The secret to maximizing your odds of success is to choose the right 
field of competition. This is just as true with habit change as it is with 
sports and business. Habits are easier to perform, and more satisfying 
to stick with, when they align with your natural inclinations and 
abilities. Like Michael Phelps in the pool or Hicham El Guerrouj on the 
track, you want to play a game where the odds are in your favor. 

Embracing this strategy requires the acceptance of the simple truth 
that people are born with different abilities. Some people don’t like to 
discuss this fact. On the surface, your genes seem to be fixed, and it’s 
no fun to talk about things you cannot control. Plus, phrases like 
biological determinism makes it sound like certain individuals are 
destined for success and others doomed to failure. But this is a 
shortsighted view of the influence of genes on behavior. 

The strength of genetics is also their weakness. Genes cannot be 
easily changed, which means they provide a powerful advantage in 
favorable circumstances and a serious disadvantage in unfavorable 
circumstances. If you want to dunk a basketball, being seven feet tall is 
very useful. If you want to perform a gymnastics routine, being seven 
feet tall is a great hindrance. Our environment determines the 
suitability of our genes and the utility of our natural talents. When our 
environment changes, so do the qualities that determine success. 

This is true not just for physical characteristics but for mental ones 
as well. I’m smart if you ask me about habits and human behavior; not 



so much when it comes to knitting, rocket propulsion, or guitar chords. 
Competence is highly dependent on context. 

The people at the top of any competitive field are not only well 
trained, they are also well suited to the task. And this is why, if you 
want to be truly great, selecting the right place to focus is crucial. 

In short: genes do not determine your destiny. They determine your 
areas of opportunity. As physician Gabor Mate notes, “Genes can 
predispose, but they don’t predetermine.” The areas where you are 
genetically predisposed to success are the areas where habits are more 
likely to be satisfying. The key is to direct your effort toward areas that 
both excite you and match your natural skills, to align your ambition 
with your ability. 

The obvious question is, “How do I figure out where the odds are in 
my favor? How do I identify the opportunities and habits that are right 
for me?” The first place we will look for an answer is by understanding 
your personality. 


HOW YOUR PERSONALITY INFLUENCES YOUR HABITS 

Your genes are operating beneath the surface of every habit. Indeed, 
beneath the surface of every behavior. Genes have been shown to 
influence everything from the number of hours you spend watching 
television to your likelihood to marry or divorce to your tendency to get 
addicted to drugs, alcohol, or nicotine. There’s a strong genetic 
component to how obedient or rebellious you are when facing 
authority, how vulnerable or resistant you are to stressful events, how 
proactive or reactive you tend to be, and even how captivated or bored 
you feel during sensory experiences like attending a concert. As Robert 
Plomin, a behavioral geneticist at King’s College in London, told me, 

“It is now at the point where we have stopped testing to see if traits 
have a genetic component because we literally can’t find a single one 
that isn’t influenced by our genes.” 

Bundled together, your unique cluster of genetic traits predispose 
you to a particular personality. Your personality is the set of 
characteristics that is consistent from situation to situation. The most 
proven scientific analysis of personality traits is known as the “Big 
Five,” which breaks them down into five spectrums of behavior. 



1. Openness to experience: from curious and inventive on one end 
to cautious and consistent on the other, 

2. Conscientiousness: organized and efficient to easygoing and 
spontaneous. 

3. Extroversion: outgoing and energetic to solitary and reserved 
(you likely know them as extroverts vs, introverts), 

4. Agreeableness: friendly and compassionate to challenging and 
detached. 

5. Neuroticism: anxious and sensitive to confident, calm, and 
stable. 

All five characteristics have biological underpinnings. Extroversion, 
for instance, can be tracked from birth. If scientists play a loud noise in 
the nursing ward, some babies turn toward it while others turn away. 
When the researchers tracked these children through life, they found 
that the babies who turned toward the noise were more likely to grow 
up to be extroverts. Those who turned away were more likely to 
become introverts. 

People who are high in agreeableness are kind, considerate, and 
warm. They also tend to have higher natural oxytocin levels, a 
hormone that plays an important role in social bonding, increases 
feelings of trust, and can act as a natural antidepressant. You can easily 
imagine how someone with more oxytocin might be inclined to build 
habits like writing thank-you notes or organizing social events. 

As a third example, consider neuroticism, which is a personality 
trait all people possess to various degrees. People who are high in 
neuroticism tend to be anxious and worry more than others. This trait 
has been linked to hypersensitivity of the amygdala, the portion of the 
brain responsible for noticing threats. In other words, people who are 
more sensitive to negative cues in their environment are more likely to 
score high in neuroticism. 

Our habits are not solely determined by our personalities, but there 
is no doubt that our genes nudge us in a certain direction. Our deeply 
rooted preferences make certain behaviors easier for some people than 
for others. You don’t have to apologize for these differences or feel 
guilty about them, but you do have to work with them, A person who 
scores lower on conscientiousness, for example, will be less likely to be 



orderly by nature and may need to rely more heavily on environment 
design to stick with good habits. (As a reminder for the less 
conscientious readers among us, environment design is a strategy we 
discussed in Chapters 6 and 12.) 

The takeaway is that you should build habits that work for your 
personality.* People can get ripped working out like a bodybuilder, but 
if you prefer rock climbing or cycling or rowing, then shape your 
exercise habit around your interests. If your friend follows a low-carb 
diet but you find that low-fat works for you, then more power to you. If 
you want to read more, don’t be embarrassed if you prefer steamy 
romance novels over nonfiction. Read whatever fascinates you.* You 
don’t have to build the habits everyone tells you to build. Choose the 
habit that best suits you, not the one that is most popular. 

There is a version of every habit that can bring you joy and 
satisfaction. Find it. Habits need to be enjoyable if they are going to 
stick. This is the core idea behind the 4th Law. 

Tailoring your habits to your personality is a good start, but this is 
not the end of the story. Let’s turn our attention to finding and 
designing situations where you’re at a natural advantage. 


HOW TO FIND A GAME WHERE THE ODDS ARE IN YOUR FAVOR 

Learning to play a game where the odds are in your favor is critical for 
maintaining motivation and feeling successful. In theory, you can 
enjoy almost anything. In practice, you are more likely to enjoy the 
things that come easily to you. People who are talented in a particular 
area tend to be more competent at that task and are then praised for 
doing a good job. They stay energized because they are making 
progress where others have failed, and because they get rewarded with 
better pay and bigger opportunities, which not only makes them 
happier but also propels them to produce even higher-quality work. It’s 
a virtuous cycle. 

Pick the right habit and progress is easy. Pick the wrong habit and 
life is a struggle. 

How do you pick the right habit? The first step is something we 
covered in the 3rd Law: make it easy. In many cases, when people pick 
the wrong habit, it simply means they picked a habit that was too 


difficult. When a habit is easy, you are more likely to be successful. 
When you are successful, you are more likely to feel satisfied. However, 
there is another level to consider. In the long-run, if you continue to 
advance and improve, any area can become challenging. At some 
point, you need to make sure you’re playing the right game for your 
skillset. How do you figure that out? 

The most common approach is trial and error. Of course, there’s a 
problem with this strategy: life is short. You don’t have time to try 
every career, date every eligible bachelor, or play every musical 
instrument. Thankfully, there is an effective way to manage this 
conundrum, and it is known as the explore/exploit trade-off. 

In the beginning of a new activity, there should be a period of 
exploration. In relationships, it’s called dating. In college, it’s called the 
liberal arts. In business, it’s called split testing. The goal is to try out 
many possibilities, research a broad range of ideas, and cast a wide net. 

After this initial period of exploration, shift your focus to the best 
solution you’ve found—but keep experimenting occasionally. The 
proper balance depends on whether you’re winning or losing. If you 
are currently winning, you exploit, exploit, exploit. If you are currently 
losing, you continue to explore, explore, explore. 

In the long-run it is probably most effective to work on the strategy 
that seems to deliver the best results about 8o to 90 percent of the 
time and keep exploring with the remaining 10 to 20 percent. Google 
famously asks employees to spend 80 percent of the workweek on their 
official job and 20 percent on projects of their choice, which has led to 
the creation of blockbuster products like AdWords and Gmail. 

The optimal approach also depends on how much time you have. If 
you have a lot of time—like someone at the beginning of their career— 
it makes more sense to explore because once you find the right thing, 
you still have a good amount of time to exploit it. If you’re pressed for 
time—say, as you come up on the deadline for a project—you should 
implement the best solution you’ve found so far and get some results. 

As you explore different options, there are a series of questions you 
can ask yourself to continually narrow in on the habits and areas that 
will be most satisfying to you: 

What feels like fun to me, but work to others? The mark of 

whether you are made for a task is not whether you love it but 



whether you can handle the pain of the task easier than most 
people. When are you enjoying yourself while other people are 
complaining? The work that hurts you less than it hurts others is 
the work you were made to do. 

What makes me lose track of time? Flow is the mental state 
you enter when you are so focused on the task at hand that the 
rest of the world fades away. This blend of happiness and peak 
performance is what athletes and performers experience when 
they are “in the zone.” It is nearly impossible to experience a flow 
state and not find the task satisfying at least to some degree. 

Where do I get greater returns than the average person? 

We are continually comparing ourselves to those around us, and a 
behavior is more likely to be satisfying when the comparison is in 
our favor. When I started writing at jamesclear.com, my email list 
grew very quickly, I wasn’t quite sure what I was doing well, but I 
knew that results seemed to be coming faster for me than for 
some of my colleagues, which motivated me to keep writing. 

What comes naturally to me? For just a moment, ignore what 
you have been taught. Ignore what society has told you. Ignore 
what others expect of you. Look inside yourself and ask, “What 
feels natural to me? When have I felt alive? When have I felt like 
the real me?” No internal judgments or people-pleasing. No 
second-guessing or self-criticism. Just feelings of engagement and 
enjoyment. Whenever you feel authentic and genuine, you are 
headed in the right direction. 

To be honest, some of this process is just luck, Michael Phelps and 
Hicham El Guerrouj were lucky to be born with a rare set of abilities 
that are highly valued by society and to be placed in the ideal 
environment for those abilities. We all have limited time on this planet, 
and the truly great among us are the ones who not only work hard but 
also have the good fortune to be exposed to opportunities that favor us. 

But what if you don’t want to leave it up to luck? 

If you can’t find a game where the odds are stacked in your favor, 
create one. Scott Adams, the cartoonist behind Dilbert, says, 

“Everyone has at least a few areas in which they could be in the top 
25% with some effort. In my case, I can draw better than most people, 
but I’m hardly an artist. And I’m not any funnier than the average 



standup comedian who never makes it big, but I’m funnier than most 
people. The magic is that few people can draw well and write jokes. It’s 
the combination of the two that makes what I do so rare. And when 
you add in my business background, suddenly I had a topic that few 
cartoonists could hope to understand without living it.” 

When you can’t win by being better, you can win by being different. 
By combining your skills, you reduce the level of competition, which 
makes it easier to stand out. You can shortcut the need for a genetic 
advantage (or for years of practice) by rewriting the rules. A good 
player works hard to win the game everyone else is playing. A great 
player creates a new game that favors their strengths and avoids their 
weaknesses. 

In college, I designed my own major, biomechanics, which was a 
combination of physics, chemistry, biology, and anatomy. I wasn’t 
smart enough to stand out among the top physics or biology majors, so 
I created my own game. And because it suited me—I was only taking 
the courses I was interested in—studying felt like less of a chore. It was 
also easier to avoid the trap of comparing myself to everyone else. After 
all, nobody else was taking the same combination of classes, so who 
could say if they were better or worse? 

Specialization is a powerful way to overcome the “accident” of bad 
genetics. The more you master a specific skill, the harder it becomes 
for others to compete with you. Many bodybuilders are stronger than 
the average arm wrestler, but even a massive bodybuilder may lose at 
arm wrestling because the arm wrestling champ has very specific 
strength. Even if you’re not the most naturally gifted, you can often win 
by being the best in a very narrow category. 

Boiling water will soften a potato but harden an egg. You can’t 
control whether you’re a potato or an egg, but you can decide to play a 
game where it’s better to be hard or soft. If you can find a more 
favorable environment, you can transform the situation from one 
where the odds are against you to one where they are in your favor. 


HOW TO GET THE MOST OUT OF YOUR GENES 

Our genes do not eliminate the need for hard work. They clarify it. 
They tell us what to work hard on. Once we realize our strengths, we 
know where to spend our time and energy. We know which types of 



opportunities to look for and which types of challenges to avoid. The 
better we understand our nature, the better our strategy can be. 

Biological differences matter. Even so, it’s more productive to focus 
on whether you are fulfilling your own potential than comparing 
yourself to someone else. The fact that you have a natural limit to any 
specific ability has nothing to do with whether you are reaching the 
ceiling of your capabilities. People get so caught up in the fact that they 
have limits that they rarely exert the effort required to get close to 
them. 

Furthermore, genes can’t make you successful if you’re not doing 
the work. Yes, it’s possible that the ripped trainer at the gym has better 
genes, but if you haven’t put in the same reps, it’s impossible to say if 
you have been dealt a better or worse genetic hand. Until you work as 
hard as those you admire, don’t explain away their success as luck. 

In summary, one of the best ways to ensure your habits remain 
satisfying over the long-run is to pick behaviors that align with your 
personality and skills. Work hard on the things that come easy. 

Chapter Summary 

■ The secret to maximizing your odds of success is to choose the 
right field of competition. 

■ Pick the right habit and progress is easy. Pick the wrong habit and 
life is a struggle. 

■ Genes cannot be easily changed, which means they provide a 
powerful advantage in favorable circumstances and a serious 
disadvantage in unfavorable circumstances. 

■ Habits are easier when they align with your natural abilities. 
Choose the habits that best suit you. 

■ Play a game that favors your strengths. If you can’t find a game 
that favors you, create one. 

■ Genes do not eliminate the need for hard work. They clarify it. 
They tell us what to work hard on. 



19 


The Goldilocks Rule: How to Stay 
Motivated in Life and Work 

I N 1955, Disneyland had just opened in Anaheim, California, when a 
ten-year-old boy walked in and asked for a job. Labor laws were 
loose back then and the boy managed to land a position selling 
guidebooks for $0.50 apiece. 

Within a year, he had transitioned to Disney’s magic shop, where he 
learned tricks from the older employees. He experimented with jokes 
and tried out simple routines on visitors. Soon he discovered that what 
he loved was not performing magic but performing in general. He set 
his sights on becoming a comedian. 

Beginning in his teenage years, he started performing in little clubs 
around Los Angeles. The crowds were small and his act was short. He 
was rarely on stage for more than five minutes. Most of the people in 
the crowd were too busy drinking or talking with friends to pay 
attention. One night, he literally delivered his stand-up routine to an 
empty club. 

It wasn’t glamorous work, but there was no doubt he was getting 
better. His first routines would only last one or two minutes. By high 
school, his material had expanded to include a five-minute act and, a 
few years later, a ten-minute show. At nineteen, he was performing 
weekly for twenty minutes at a time. He had to read three poems 
during the show just to make the routine long enough, but his skills 
continued to progress. 

He spent another decade experimenting, adjusting, and practicing. 
He took a job as a television writer and, gradually, he was able to land 


his own appearances on talk shows. By the mid-1970s, he had worked 
his way into being a regular guest on The Tonight Show and Saturday 
Night Live. 

Finally, after nearly fifteen years of work, the young man rose to 
fame. He toured sixty cities in sixty-three days. Then seventy-two cities 
in eighty days. Then eighty-five cities in ninety days. He had 18,695 
people attend one show in Ohio. Another 45,000 tickets were sold for 
his three-day show in New York. He catapulted to the top of his genre 
and became one of the most successful comedians of his time. 

His name is Steve Martin. 

Martin’s story offers a fascinating perspective on what it takes to 
stick with habits for the long run. Comedy is not for the timid. It is 
hard to imagine a situation that would strike fear into the hearts of 
more people than performing alone on stage and failing to get a single 
laugh. And yet Steve Martin faced this fear every week for eighteen 
years. In his words, “10 years spent learning, 4 years spent refining, 
and 4 years as a wild success.” 

Why is it that some people, like Martin, stick with their habits— 
whether practicing jokes or drawing cartoons or playing guitar—while 
most of us struggle to stay motivated? How do we design habits that 
pull us in rather than ones that fade away? Scientists have been 
studying this question for many years. While there is still much to 
learn, one of the most consistent findings is that the way to maintain 
motivation and achieve peak levels of desire is to work on tasks of “just 
manageable difficulty.” 

The human brain loves a challenge, but only if it is within an 
optimal zone of difficulty. If you love tennis and try to play a serious 
match against a four-year-old, you will quickly become bored. It’s too 
easy. You’ll win every point. In contrast, if you play a professional 
tennis player like Roger Federer or Serena Williams, you will quickly 
lose motivation because the match is too difficult. 

Now consider playing tennis against someone who is your equal. As 
the game progresses, you win a few points and you lose a few. You have 
a good chance of winning, but only if you really try. Your focus 
narrows, distractions fade away, and you find yourself fully invested in 
the task at hand. This is a challenge of just manageable difficulty and it 
is a prime example of the Goldiloeks Rule. 



The Goldilocks Rule states that humans experience peak motivation 
when working on tasks that are right on the edge of their current 
abilities. Not too hard. Not too easy. Just right. 


THE GOLDILOCKS RULE 


MOTIVATION 


GOLDILOCKS 



DIFFICULTY - > 

FIGURE 15: Maximum motivation occurs when facing a challenge of just 
manageable difficulty. In psychology research this is known as the Yerkes- 
Dodson law, which describes the optimal level of arousal as the midpoint 
between boredom and anxiety. 


Martin’s comedy career is an excellent example of the Goldilocks 
Rule in practice. Each year, he expanded his comedy routine—but only 
by a minute or two. He was always adding new material, but he also 
kept a few jokes that were guaranteed to get laughs. There were just 
enough victories to keep him motivated and just enough mistakes to 
keep him working hard. 

When you’re starting a new habit, it’s important to keep the 
behavior as easy as possible so you can stick with it even when 
conditions aren’t perfect. This is an idea we covered in detail while 
discussing the 3rd Law of Behavior Change. 





Once a habit has been established, however, it’s important to 
continue to advance in small ways. These little improvements and new 
challenges keep you engaged. And if you hit the Goldilocks Zone just 
right, you can achieve a. flow state.* 

A flow state is the experience of being “in the zone” and fully 
immersed in an activity. Scientists have tried to quantify this feeling. 
They found that to achieve a state of flow, a task must be roughly 4 
percent beyond your current ability. In real life it’s typically not 
feasible to quantify the difficulty of an action in this way, but the core 
idea of the Goldilocks Rule remains: working on challenges of just 
manageable difficulty—something on the perimeter of your ability— 
seems crucial for maintaining motivation. 

Improvement requires a delicate balance. You need to regularly 
search for challenges that push you to your edge while continuing to 
make enough progress to stay motivated. Behaviors need to remain 
novel in order for them to stay attractive and satisfying. Without 
variety, we get bored. And boredom is perhaps the greatest villain on 
the quest for self-improvement. 


HOW TO STAY FOCUSED WHEN YOU GET BORED WORKING ON 

YOUR GOALS 

After my baseball career ended, I was looking for a new sport. I joined 
a weightlifting team and one day an elite coach visited our gym. He had 
worked with thousands of athletes during his long career, including a 
few Olympians. I introduced myself and we began talking about the 
process of improvement. 

“What’s the difference between the best athletes and everyone else?” 
I asked. “What do the really successful people do that most don’t?” 

He mentioned the factors you might expect: genetics, luck, talent. 
But then he said something I wasn’t expecting: “At some point it comes 
down to who can handle the boredom of training every day, doing the 
same lifts over and over and over,” 

His answer surprised me because it’s a different way of thinking 
about work ethic. People talk about getting “amped up” to work on 
their goals. Whether it’s business or sports or art, you hear people say 
things like, “It all comes down to passion.” Or, “You have to really want 


it.” As a result, many of us get depressed when we lose focus or 
motivation because we think that successful people have some 
bottomless reserve of passion. But this coach was saying that really 
successful people/ee/ the same lack of motivation as everyone else. The 
difference is that they still find a way to show up despite the feelings of 
boredom. 

Mastery requires practice. But the more you practice something, the 
more boring and routine it becomes. Once the beginner gains have 
been made and we learn what to expect, our interest starts to fade. 
Sometimes it happens even faster than that. All you have to do is hit 
the gym a few days in a row or publish a couple of blog posts on time 
and letting one day slip doesn’t feel like much. Things are going well. 
It’s easy to rationalize taking a day off because you’re in a good place. 

The greatest threat to success is not failure but boredom. We get 
bored with habits because they stop delighting us. The outcome 
becomes expected. And as our habits become ordinary, we start 
derailing our progress to seek novelty. Perhaps this is why we get 
caught up in a never-ending cycle, jumping from one workout to the 
next, one diet to the next, one business idea to the next. As soon as we 
experience the slightest dip in motivation, we begin seeking a new 
strategy—even if the old one was still working. As Machiavelli noted, 
“Men desire novelty to such an extent that those who are doing well 
wish for a change as much as those who are doing badly.” 

Perhaps this is why many of the most habit-forming products are 
those that provide continuous forms of novelty. Video games provide 
visual novelty. Porn provides sexual novelty. Junk foods provide 
culinary novelty. Each of these experiences offer continual elements of 
surprise. 

In psychology, this is known as a variable reward.^ Slot machines 
are the most common real-world example. A gambler hits the jackpot 
every now and then but not at any predictable interval. The pace of 
rewards varies. This variance leads to the greatest spike of dopamine, 
enhances memory recall, and accelerates habit formation. 

Variable rewards won’t create a craving—that is, you can’t take a 
reward people are uninterested in, give it to them at a variable interval, 
and hope it will change their mind—but they are a powerful way to 
amplify the cravings we already experience because they reduce 
boredom. 


The sweet spot of desire occurs at a 50/50 split between success and 
failure. Half of the time you get what you want. Half of the time you 
don’t. You need just enough “winning” to experience satisfaction and 
just enough “wanting” to experience desire. This is one of the benefits 
of following the Goldilocks Rule. If you’re already interested in a habit, 
working on challenges of just manageable difficulty is a good way to 
keep things interesting. 

Of course, not all habits have a variable reward component, and you 
wouldn’t want them to. If Google only delivered a useful search result 
some of the time, I would switch to a competitor pretty quickly. If Uber 
only picked up half of my trips, I doubt I’d be using that service much 
longer. And if I flossed my teeth each night and only sometimes ended 
up with a clean mouth, I think I’d skip it. 

Variable rewards or not, no habit will stay interesting forever. At 
some point, everyone faces the same challenge on the journey of self- 
improvement: you have to fall in love with boredom. 

We all have goals that we would like to achieve and dreams that we 
would like to fulfill, but it doesn’t matter what you are trying to become 
better at, if you only do the work when it’s convenient or exciting, then 
you’ll never be consistent enough to achieve remarkable results. 

I can guarantee that if you manage to start a habit and keep sticking 
to it, there will be days when you feel like quitting. When you start a 
business, there will be days when you don’t feel like showing up. When 
you’re at the gym, there will be sets that you don’t feel like finishing. 
When it’s time to write, there will be days that you don’t feel like 
typing. But stepping up when it’s annoying or painful or draining to do 
so, that’s what makes the difference between a professional and an 
amateur. 

Professionals stick to the schedule; amateurs let life get in the way. 
Professionals know what is important to them and work toward it with 
purpose; amateurs get pulled off course by the urgencies of life. 

David Cain, an author and meditation teacher, encourages his 
students to avoid being “fair-weather meditators.” Similarly, you don’t 
want to be a fair-weather athlete or a fair-weather writer or a fair- 
weather anything. When a habit is truly important to you, you have to 
be willing to stick to it in any mood. Professionals take action even 



when the mood isn’t right. They might not enjoy it, but they find a way 
to put the reps in. 

There have been a lot of sets that I haven’t felt like finishing, but I’ve 
never regretted doing the workout. There have been a lot of articles I 
haven’t felt like writing, but I’ve never regretted publishing on 
schedule. There have been a lot of days I’ve felt like relaxing, but I’ve 
never regretted showing up and working on something that was 
important to me. 

The only way to become excellent is to be endlessly fascinated by 
doing the same thing over and over. You have to fall in love with 
boredom. 

Chapter Summary 

■ The Goldilocks Rule states that humans experience peak 
motivation when working on tasks that are right on the edge of 
their current abilities. 

■ The greatest threat to success is not failure but boredom. 

■ As habits become routine, they become less interesting and less 
satisfying. We get bored. 

■ Anyone can work hard when they feel motivated. It’s the ability to 
keep going when work isn’t exciting that makes the difference. 

■ Professionals stick to the schedule; amateurs let life get in the 
way. 



20 


The Downside of Creating Good Habits 

H abits create the foundation for mastery. In chess, it is only after 
the basic movements of the pieces have become automatic that a 
player can focus on the next level of the game. Each chunk of 
information that is memorized opens up the mental space for more 
effortful thinking. This is true for any endeavor. When you know the 
simple movements so well that you can perform them without 
thinking, you are free to pay attention to more advanced details. In this 
way, habits are the backbone of any pursuit of excellence. 

However, the benefits of habits come at a cost. At first, each 
repetition develops fluency, speed, and skill. But then, as a habit 
becomes automatic, you become less sensitive to feedback. You fall 
into mindless repetition. It becomes easier to let mistakes slide. When 
you can do it “good enough” on autopilot, you stop thinking about how 
to do it better. 

The upside of habits is that we can do things without thinking. The 
downside of habits is that you get used to doing things a certain way 
and stop paying attention to little errors. You assume you’re getting 
better because you’re gaining experience. In reality, you are merely 
reinforcing your current habits—not improving them. In fact, some 
research has shown that once a skill has been mastered there is usually 
a slight decline in performance over time. 

Usually, this minor dip in performance is no cause for worry. You 
don’t need a system to continuously improve how well you brush your 
teeth or tie your shoes or make your morning cup of tea. With habits 
like these, good enough is usually good enough. The less energy you 


spend on trivial choices, the more you can spend it on what really 
matters. 

However, when you want to maximize your potential and achieve 
elite levels of performance, you need a more nuanced approach. You 
can’t repeat the same things blindly and expect to become exceptional. 
Habits are necessary, but not sufficient for mastery. What you need is a 
combination of automatic habits and deliberate practice. 

Habits + Deliberate Practice = Mastery 

To become great, certain skills do need to become automatic. 
Basketball players need to be able to dribble without thinking before 
they can move on to mastering layups with their nondominant hand. 
Surgeons need to repeat the first incision so many times that they 
could do it with their eyes closed, so that they can focus on the 
hundreds of variables that arise during surgery. But after one habit has 
been mastered, you have to return to the effortful part of the work and 
begin building the next habit. 

Mastery is the process of narrowing your focus to a tiny element of 
success, repeating it until you have internalized the skill, and then 
using this new habit as the foundation to advance to the next frontier 
of your development. Old tasks become easier the second time around, 
but it doesn’t get easier overall because now you’re pouring your 
energy into the next challenge. Each habit unlocks the next level of 
performance. It’s an endless cycle. 


MASTERING ONE HABIT 




MASTERING A FIELD 



REPETITONS 

FIGURE 16: The process of mastery requires that you progressively layer 
improvements on top of one another, each habit building upon the last until a 
new level of performance has been reached and a higher range of skills has 
been internalized. 


Although habits are powerful, what you need is a way to remain 
conscious of your performance over time, so you can continue to refine 
and improve. It is precisely at the moment when you begin to feel like 
you have mastered a skill—right when things are starting to feel 









automatic and you are becoming comfortable—that you must avoid 
slipping into the trap of complacency. 

The solution? Establish a system for reflection and review. 


HOW TO REVIEW YOUR HABITS AND MAKE ADJUSTMENTS 

In 1986, the Los Angeles Lakers had one of the most talented 
basketball teams ever assembled, but they are rarely remembered that 
way. The team started the 1985-1986 NBA season with an astounding 
29-5 record. “The pundits were saying that we might be the best team 
in the history of basketball,” head coach Pat Riley said after the season. 
Surprisingly, the Lakers stumbled in the 1986 playoffs and suffered a 
season-ending defeat in the Western Conference Finals. The “best 
team in the history of basketball” didn’t even play for the NBA 
championship. 

After that blow, Riley was tired of hearing about how much talent 
his players had and about how much promise his team held. He didn’t 
want to see flashes of brilliance followed by a gradual fade in 
performance. He wanted the Lakers to play up to their potential, night 
after night. In the summer of 1986, he created a plan to do exactly that, 
a system that he called the Career Best Effort program or CBE, 

“When players first join the Lakers,” Riley explained, “we track their 
basketball statistics all the way back to high school. I call this Taking 
Their Number, We look for an accurate gauge of what a player can do, 
then build him into our plan for the team, based on the notion that he 
will maintain and then improve upon his averages,” 

After determining a player’s baseline level of performance, Riley 
added a key step. He asked each player to “improve their output by at 
least 1 percent over the course of the season. If they succeeded, it 
would be a CBE, or Career Best Effort,” Similar to the British Cycling 
team that we discussed in Chapter 1, the Lakers sought peak 
performance by getting slightly better each day. 

Riley was careful to point out that CBE was not merely about points 
or statistics but about giving your “best effort spiritually and mentally 
and physically.” Players got credit for “allowing an opponent to run 
into you when you know that a foul will be called against him, diving 
for loose balls, going after rebounds whether you are likely to get them 



or not, helping a teammate when the player he’s guarding has surged 
past him, and other ‘unsung hero’ deeds.” 

As an example, let’s say that Magic Johnson—the Lakers star player 
at the time—had ii points, 8 rebounds, 12 assists, 2 steals, and 5 
turnovers in a game. Magic also got credit for an “unsung hero” deed 
by diving after a loose ball (+1). Finally, he played a total of 33 minutes 
in this imaginary game. 

The positive numbers (11 + 8 + 12 + 2 + 1) add up to 34. Then, we 
subtract the 5 turnovers (34-5) to get 29. Finally, we divide 29 by 33 
minutes played. 

29/33 = 0.879 

Magic’s CBE number here would be 879. This number was 
calculated for all of a player’s games, and it was the average CBE that a 
player was asked to improve by 1 percent over the season. Riley 
compared each player’s current CBE to not only their past 
performances but also those of other players in the league. As Riley put 
it, “We rank team members alongside league opponents who play the 
same position and have similar role definitions.” 

Sportswriter Jackie MacMullan noted, “Riley trumpeted the top 
performers in the league in bold lettering on the blackboard each week 
and measured them against the corresponding players on his own 
roster. Solid, reliable players generally rated a score in the 600s, while 
elite players scored at least 800. Magic Johnson, who submitted 138 
triple-doubles in his career, often scored over 1,000.” 

The Lakers also emphasized year-over-year progress by making 
historical comparisons of CBE data. Riley said, “We stacked the month 
of November 1986, next to November 1985, and showed the players 
whether they were doing better or worse than at the same point last 
season. Then we showed them how their performance figures for 
December 1986, stacked up against November’s.” 

The Lakers rolled out CBE in October 1986. Eight months later, they 
were NBA champions. The following year, Pat Riley led his team to 
another title as the Lakers became the first team in twenty years to win 
back-to-back NBA championships. Afterward, he said, “Sustaining an 
effort is the most important thing for any enterprise. The way to be 
successful is to learn how to do things right, then do them the same 
way every time.” 



The CBE program is a prime example of the power of reflection and 
review. The Lakers were already talented. CBE helped them get the 
most out of what they had, and made sure their habits improved rather 
than declined. 

Reflection and review enables the long-term improvement of all 
habits because it makes you aware of your mistakes and helps you 
consider possible paths for improvement. Without reflection, we can 
make excuses, create rationalizations, and lie to ourselves. We have no 
process for determining whether we are performing better or worse 
compared to yesterday. 

Top performers in all fields engage in various types of reflection and 
review, and the process doesn’t have to be complex. Kenyan runner 
Eliud Kipchoge is one of the greatest marathoners of all time and an 
Olympic gold medalist. He still takes notes after every practice in 
which he reviews his training for the day and searches for areas that 
can be improved. Similarly, gold medal swimmer Katie Ledecky 
records her wellness on a scale of i to lo and includes notes on her 
nutrition and how well she slept. She also records the times posted by 
other swimmers. At the end of each week, her coach goes over her 
notes and adds his thoughts. 

It’s not just athletes, either. When comedian Chris Rock is preparing 
fresh material, he will first appear at small nightclubs dozens of times 
and test hundreds of jokes. He brings a notepad on stage and records 
which bits go over well and where he needs to make adjustments. The 
few killer lines that survive will form the backbone of his new show. 

I know of executives and investors who keep a “decision journal” in 
which they record the major decisions they make each week, why they 
made them, and what they expect the outcome to be. They review their 
choices at the end of each month or year to see where they were correct 
and where they went wrong.* 

Improvement is not just about learning habits, it’s also about fine- 
tuning them. Reflection and review ensures that you spend your time 
on the right things and make course corrections whenever necessary- 
like Pat Riley adjusting the effort of his players on a nightly basis. You 
don’t want to keep practicing a habit if it becomes ineffective. 

Personally, I employ two primary modes of reflection and review. 
Each December, I perform an Annual Review, in which I reflect on the 


previous year. I tally my habits for the year by counting up how many 
articles I published, how many workouts I put in, how many new 
places I visited, and more.* Then, I reflect on my progress (or lack 
thereof) by answering three questions: 

1. What went well this year? 

2. What didn’t go so well this year? 

3. What did I learn? 

Six months later, when summer rolls around, I conduct an Integrity 
Report. Like everyone, I make a lot of mistakes. My Integrity Report 
helps me realize where I went wrong and motivates me to get back on 
course. I use it as a time to revisit my core values and consider whether 
I have been living in accordance with them. This is when I reflect on 
my identity and how I can work toward being the type of person I wish 
to become.* 

My yearly Integrity Report answers three questions: 

1. What are the core values that drive my life and work? 

2. How am I living and working with integrity right now? 

3. How can I set a higher standard in the future? 

These two reports don’t take very long—just a few hours per year- 
hut they are crucial periods of refinement. They prevent the gradual 
slide that happens when I don’t pay close attention. They provide an 
annual reminder to revisit my desired identity and consider how my 
habits are helping me become the type of person I wish to be. They 
indicate when I should upgrade my habits and take on new challenges 
and when I should dial my efforts back and focus on the fundamentals. 

Reflection can also bring a sense of perspective. Daily habits are 
powerful because of how they compound, but worrying too much about 
every daily choice is like looking at yourself in the mirror from an inch 
away. You can see every imperfection and lose sight of the bigger 
picture. There is too much feedback. Conversely, never reviewing your 
habits is like never looking in the mirror. You aren’t aware of easily 
fixable flaws—a spot on your shirt, a bit of food in your teeth. There is 


too little feedback. Periodic reflection and review is like viewing 
yourself in the mirror from a conversational distance. You can see the 
important changes you should make without losing sight of the bigger 
picture. You want to view the entire mountain range, not obsess over 
each peak and valley. 

Finally, reflection and review offers an ideal time to revisit one of 
the most important aspects of behavior change: identity. 


HOW TO BREAK THE BELIEFS THAT HOLD YOU BACK 

In the beginning, repeating a habit is essential to build up evidence of 
your desired identity. As you latch on to that new identity, however, 
those same beliefs can hold you back from the next level of growth. 
When working against you, your identity creates a kind of “pride” that 
encourages you to deny your weak spots and prevents you from truly 
growing. This is one of the greatest downsides of building habits. 

The more sacred an idea is to us—that is, the more deeply it is tied 
to our identity—the more strongly we will defend it against criticism. 
You see this in every industry. The schoolteacher who ignores 
innovative teaching methods and sticks with her tried-and-true lesson 
plans. The veteran manager who is committed to doing things “his 
way,” The surgeon who dismisses the ideas of her younger colleagues. 
The band who produces a mind-blowing first album and then gets 
stuck in a rut. The tighter we cling to an identity, the harder it becomes 
to grow beyond it. 

One solution is to avoid making any single aspect of your identity an 
overwhelming portion of who you are. In the words of investor Paul 
Graham, “keep your identity small,” The more you let a single belief 
define you, the less capable you are of adapting when life challenges 
you. If you tie everything up in being the point guard or the partner at 
the firm or whatever else, then the loss of that facet of your life will 
wreck you. If you’re a vegan and then develop a health condition that 
forces you to change your diet, you’ll have an identity crisis on your 
hands. When you cling too tightly to one identity, you become brittle. 
Lose that one thing and you lose yourself. 

For most of my young life, being an athlete was a major part of my 
identity. After my baseball career ended, I struggled to find myself. 



When you spend your whole life defining yourself in one way and that 
disappears, who are you now? 

Military veterans and former entrepreneurs report similar feelings. 
If your identity is wrapped up in a belief like “I’m a great soldier,” what 
happens when your period of service ends? For many business owners, 
their identity is something along the lines of “I’m the CEO” or “I’m the 
founder,” If you have spent every waking moment working on your 
business, how will you feel after you sell the company? 

The key to mitigating these losses of identity is to redefine yourself 
such that you get to keep important aspects of your identity even if 
your particular role changes, 

■ “I’m an athlete” becomes “I’m the type of person who is mentally 
tough and loves a physical challenge,” 

■ “I’m a great soldier” transforms into “I’m the type of person who 
is disciplined, reliable, and great on a team,” 

■ “I’m the CEO” translates to “I’m the type of person who builds 
and creates things,” 

When chosen effectively, an identity can be flexible rather than 
brittle. Like water flowing around an obstacle, your identity works with 
the changing circumstances rather than against them. 

The following quote from the Tao Te Ching encapsulates the ideas 
perfectly: 

Men are born soft and supple; 
dead, they are stiff and hard. 

Plants are born tender and pliant; 
dead, they are brittle and dry. 

Thus whoever is stiff and inflexible 
is a diseiple of death. 

Whoever is soft and yielding 
is a diseiple of life. 

The hard and stiff will be broken. 



The soft and supple will prevail. 

—Lao Tzu 

Habits deliver numerous benefits, but the downside is that they can 
lock us into our previous patterns of thinking and acting—even when 
the world is shifting around us. Everything is impermanent. Life is 
constantly changing, so you need to periodically check in to see if your 
old habits and beliefs are still serving you, 

A lack of self-awareness is poison. Reflection and review is the 
antidote. 

Chapter Summary 

■ The upside of habits is that we can do things without thinking. 
The downside is that we stop paying attention to little errors, 

■ Habits + Deliberate Practice = Mastery 

■ Reflection and review is a process that allows you to remain 
conscious of your performance over time, 

■ The tighter we cling to an identity, the harder it becomes to grow 
beyond it. 



Conclusion 


The Secret to Results That Last 

T here is an ancient Greek parable known as the Sorites Paradox,* 
which talks about the effect one small action can have when 
repeated enough times. One formulation of the paradox goes as 
follows: Can one coin make a person rich? If you give a person a pile of 
ten coins, you wouldn’t claim that he or she is rich. But what if you add 
another? And another? And another? At some point, you will have to 
admit that no one can be rich unless one coin can make him or her so. 

We can say the same about atomic habits. Can one tiny change 
transform your life? It’s unlikely you would say so. But what if you 
made another? And another? And another? At some point, you will 
have to admit that your life was transformed by one small change. 

The holy grail of habit change is not a single i percent improvement, 
but a thousand of them. It’s a bunch of atomic habits stacking up, each 
one a fundamental unit of the overall system. 

In the beginning, small improvements can often seem meaningless 
because they get washed away by the weight of the system. Just as one 
coin won’t make you rich, one positive change like meditating for one 
minute or reading one page each day is unlikely to deliver a noticeable 
difference. 

Gradually, though, as you continue to layer small changes on top of 
one another, the scales of life start to move. Each improvement is like 
adding a grain of sand to the positive side of the scale, slowly tilting 
things in your favor. Eventually, if you stick with it, you hit a tipping 
point. Suddenly, it feels easier to stick with good habits. The weight of 
the system is working for you rather than against you. 

Over the course of this book, we’ve looked at dozens of stories about 
top performers. We’ve heard about Olympic gold medalists, award¬ 
winning artists, business leaders, lifesaving physicians, and star 
comedians who have all used the science of small habits to master their 


craft and vault to the top of their field. Each of the people, teams, and 
companies we have covered has faced different circumstances, but 
ultimately progressed in the same way: through a commitment to tiny, 
sustainable, unrelenting improvements. 

Success is not a goal to reach or a finish line to cross. It is a system 
to improve, an endless process to refine. In Chapter i, I said, “If you’re 
having trouble changing your habits, the problem isn’t you. The 
problem is your system. Bad habits repeat themselves again and again 
not because you don’t want to change, but because you have the wrong 
system for change.” 

As this book draws to a close, I hope the opposite is true. With the 
Four Laws of Behavior Change, you have a set of tools and strategies 
that you can use to build better systems and shape better habits. 
Sometimes a habit will be hard to remember and you’ll need to make it 
obvious. Other times you won’t feel like starting and you’ll need to 
make it attraetive. In many cases, you may find that a habit will be too 
difficult and you’ll need to make it easy. And sometimes, you won’t feel 
like sticking with it and you’ll need to make it satisfying. 

Behaviors are effortless here. Behaviors are difficult here. 


Obvious 

Invisible 

Attractive 

Unattractive 

Easy 

Hard 

Satisfying 

Unsatisfying 


You want to push your good habits toward the left side of the spectrum by 
making them obvious, attractive, easy, and satisfying. Meanwhile, you want 
to cluster your bad habits toward the right side by making them invisible, 
unattractive, hard, and unsatisfying. 

This is a continuous process. There is no finish line. There is no 
permanent solution. Whenever you’re looking to improve, you can 
rotate through the Four Laws of Behavior Change until you find the 
next bottleneck. Make it obvious. Make it attraetive. Make it easy. 
Make it satisfying. Round and round. Always looking for the next way 
to get 1 percent better. 

The secret to getting results that last is to never stop making 
improvements. It’s remarkable what you can build if you just don’t 



stop. It’s remarkable the business you can build if you don’t stop 
working. It’s remarkable the body you can build if you don’t stop 
training. It’s remarkable the knowledge you can build if you don’t stop 
learning. It’s remarkable the fortune you can build if you don’t stop 
saving. It’s remarkable the friendships you can build if you don’t stop 
caring. Small habits don’t add up. They compound. 

That’s the power of atomic habits. Tiny changes. Remarkable 
results. 